

=== PAGE 1 ===
 Classification: Public 
 
Apprenticeship and Industry Training 
 
 
 
 
Apprenticeship 
Curriculum 
Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Welder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 2 ===
 Classification: Public 
 
Welder: Apprenticeship Education Program Curriculum Guide | Advanced Education 
August 4, 2026 | ISBN 978-1-4601-6513-3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 Government of Alberta. This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence – Alberta 
(https://open.alberta.ca/licence). Please note that the terms of this licence do not apply to any third-party materials 
included in this publication. 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 Classification: Public 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Apprenticeship and Industry Training (AIT) wishes to express sincere appreciation for the contribution of 
the many tradespersons, industrial establishments, professional associations, labour organizations, 
provincial and territorial government departments and agencies, and all others who contributed to this 
publication. 
Special thanks to the following subject matter experts for sharing their knowledge and insights, which 
were instrumental in developing the standard: 
 
Harold Babuik Kelly Loren 
Natalie Bak Nicholas Lenko 
Colin Bishop Freddy Liriano 
Andrew Connors Shelley Longman 
Richard Dixon Chris McFee 
Peter Hawrylyshen Josh Post 
Xianda Hou Brad Preece 
Terra Kress Jill Timushka 
 
 
Additionally, AIT would like to extend its appreciation to the following organizations for their valuable 
contributions and expert advice throughout the development of the standard:  
 
Alberta Pipe Trades College Northwestern Polytechnic 
Keyano College Olds College 
Lakeland College Piping Industry Training School 
Lethbridge Polytechnic Portage College 
Medicine Hat College Red Deer Polytechnic 
Northern Alberta Institute of Technology Southern Alberta Institute of Technology 
Northern Lakes College  
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 4 ===
 
- 1 - Classification: Public 
 
Program Guide 
 
 
Description of the Welder Trade  ....................................................................................................  2 
Apprenticeship Education Entrance Requirements ........................................................................  3 
What To Expect  ............................................................................................................................... 3 
Apprenticeship Pathway to Certification  ......................................................................................... 4 
Core Competences .........................................................................................................................  5 
Determining Success ......................................................................................................................  5 
Thriving ............................................................................................................................................ 5 
Defined Learning  ............................................................................................................................. 6 
Course Content Overview  ..............................................................................................................  8 
Period One Course Content  .........................................................................................................  13 
Period Two Course Content  .........................................................................................................  23 
Period Three Course Content  ......................................................................................................  31 
Taxonomy Verb List  .....................................................................................................................  37 
 


=== PAGE 5 ===
 
- 2 - Classification: Public 
 
Description of the 
Welder Trade 
 
Welders in Alberta join and sever metals to fabricate, assemble, repair, and modify structural steel and 
metal components - such as beams, girders, vessels, and piping - by selecting, setting up, and operating 
welding, cutting, and gouging equipment; interpreting drawings and welding symbols; preparing and fitting 
materials; and applying codes, standards, and safety requirements to produce sound welds that meet 
inspection and quality standards in construction, manufacturing, and industrial maintenance settings. 
A journeyperson Welder is an individual who may be able to: 
 
• Apply occupational health and safety requirements. 
• Perform safe material handling and access activities.  
• Read and interpret drawings, specifications, and welding/NDT symbols. 
• Apply trades math.  
• Lay out and prepare materials for fabrication.  
• Assemble, set up, operate, and maintain oxyfuel equipment. 
• Cut and gouge using arc/plasma processes.  
• Perform Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW).  
• Perform wire-feed welding processes (GMAW/FCAW/MCAW).  
• Perform Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW). 
• Apply Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) principles where required. 
• Identify metals and apply basic metallurgy concepts. 
• Evaluate weld quality and compliance. 
• Perform mentorship. 
• Use other processes. 
 
 


=== PAGE 6 ===
 
- 3 - Classification: Public 
 
Apprenticeship Education 
Entrance Requirements 
 
 
Apprenticeship education entrance requirements will NOT  prevent an individual 
from registering into an apprentice education program as an apprentice; however, 
they will restrict  that individual’s ability  to register for the in- classroom training 
portion of the training until  those requirements have satisfied the education  
entrance requirement for that trade. T he minimum education entrance 
requirements for Welder are: 
• English 10-2, Math 10-3 
• OR a pass mark in all five Canadian General Educational Development 
(GED) tests or Canadian Adult Education Credential tests 
• OR an Apprenticeship and Industry Training entrance examination. 
 
To increase an individual’s chances of success in classroom instruction for the 
Welder Apprenticeship Education Program, successful completion of English 30-2, 
Math 30-3, Physics 20 OR Chemistry 20 OR Science 20 and related Career and 
Technology Studies (CTS) courses are recommended. 
 
 
 
 
 
What to Expect 
 
Apprenticeship is a training program that combines on-the-job and in-classroom training for a specific 
profession designated as a trade. 
It may be a new form or model of learning to some individuals, however, has been the cornerstone to 
large portions of Alberta’s industry training and economy for almost a century.  
In the process of progressing through an apprenticeship education program, the learner experiences both 
the theoretical and practical components of their chosen discipline and will be assessed in both the 
classroom and working environments.   
The following flow chart presents a visual representation of what a learner can expect while progressing 
though the Welder program.   
 
 


=== PAGE 7 ===
 
- 4 - Classification: Public 
 
Apprentice Pathway to Certification 
 
Register (Pre-Apprenticeship) 
 
• Choose a program. 
• Meet the apprenticeship eligibility requirements. 
• Complete the application and include any Prior Learning 
Assessments  
 
 
On-the-job 
Welder Period 1 
• 1560 hours 
Welder Period 2 
• 1560 hours 
Welder Period 3 
• 1560 hours  
Apprentices must have an Apprenticeship Education Agreement 
with a sponsor to earn on-the-job hours. 
Classroom Instruction 
Welder Period 1 
• 240 hours 
Welder Period 2 
• 240 hours 
Welder Period 3 
• 240 hours  
Apprentices must meet minimum education requirements 
prior to entrance in classroom instruction. 
Competence-based Assessments 
Each period, apprentices are assessed:  
• on-the-job (by mentors) 
• in the classroom (by instructors) 
• through period exams (by Apprenticeship and Industry Training) 
 
 
Certification 
 
• Post Secondary Education Credential 
• Journeyperson Certificate 
 
 
 
Apply 
Learn 
Earn 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
- 5 - Classification: Public 
 
Core Competences 
 
The foundation of an apprenticeship education program is defined by its core competences. These 
competences are what the training will focus on as the learner progresses through the Welder 
Apprenticeship Education Program.  
A core competence is an observable skill that is demonstrated by the learner. Competences are identified 
by industry subject matter experts and cover the job-related tasks and activities that a Welder will be 
required to perform in the course of their employment.  
 
 
Determining Success 
 
Grades for the theory component of technical training (classroom instruction) are calculated and based on 
a cumulative weighted average. To complete a period of classroom instruction successfully, an 
apprentice must achieve a minimum cumulative weighted average of 65% across all sections in the 
classroom instruction component of their apprenticeship education program with no grades below 50% in 
any one section.  
Lab and shop components are calculated as a cumulative weighted average requiring a minimum of 65% 
with a minimum grade of 65% in each section. 
 
 
Thriving 
 
Successful completion of the Welder Apprenticeship Education Program is an accomplishment that 
should be celebrated and can continue to be a successful provider and career choice for a lifetime.  
 It can also become a useful lever that opens doors leading to future career choice enhancers and/or 
create alternate professions pathways. This may include some of the following: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Coordinator 
 
 
 
 
Trades to 
Degrees 
Programs 
 
 
 
Instructor 
 
  
 
Business 
Competencies 
Certificate 
  
 
 
Manufacturing 
Representative 
Business 
Owner 


=== PAGE 9 ===
 
- 6 - Classification: Public 
 
Defined Learning 
 
 
 
This curriculum guide was developed based on the core competences 
for this trade. 
The Core Competence Statements document can be accessed 
through this QR code or found by visiting the Alberta Apprenticeship 
and Industry Training (AIT) website (tradesecrets.alberta.ca) 
 
 
Section   Each section in a period supports a core competence for this trade. The 
section is the highest-level division in a curriculum guide that groups related 
topics under one title. 
Weighting  Each section is assigned a weighting (in percent and hours) by industry to 
reflect the approximate amount of available time that is dedicated to it, on 
average, in the learning environment.  
 
Example: Period One Course Content 
 
Section Title Weighting 
Hours % 
Foundational Skills, Job Responsibilities and 
Procedures 65 27% 
Tools, Equipment, and Instruments 22 9% 
Drawings and Specifications 24 10% 
Rigging: Hoisting, Lifting and Load-Moving 67 28% 
Cutting and Fabrication 62 26% 
TOTAL   240 100% 
  
Topic  A topic is an area of focus within a section that identifies an outcome and its 
associated objectives. Each topic has its own assigned weighting in hours and 
percentages. 
Outcome  An outcome states what a student will be able to do within an area of focus. 


=== PAGE 10 ===
 
- 7 - Classification: Public 
Objective  An objective is a specific, measurable step that a learner must do to achieve 
the topic’s outcome. 
Taxonomy  Taxonomies are a cognitive framework of learning behaviors organized 
hierarchically in categories: knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, 
evaluation, and synthesis. Taxonomy is used as a tool to identify and create 
learning objectives that define and measure the learning experience for all 
stakeholders involved.  
For the purposes of Alberta’s apprenticeship education assessments, 
taxonomies are classified into three of these categories:  
• Taxonomy I competences focus on recollection of facts, definitions, and 
principles.   
• Taxonomy II competences are a procedural application of knowledge (i.e. 
reference to a step-by-step process). 
• Taxonomy III competences deal with critical thinking and problem solving 
(i.e. diagnosis and analysis). 
These categories identify the type of skill set that will be applied to be 
successful.  
Some topics have multiple taxonomies that will require the training to address 
different skill sets. 
 
 
 
NOTE: A taxonomy verb list is also attached in the 
appendix to demonstrate the level and/or complexity of a 
given taxonomy. 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 11 ===
 
- 8 - Classification: Public 
 
Course Content Overview 
 
PERIOD ONE COURSE CONTENT 
 
 
SECTION ONE 
  
Topics: 
        
Foundational Skills, 
Safety and Procedures 
  A  B  C 
  
Welder Apprenticeship 
Training Program 
Orientation 
 
Safety, Legislation, 
Regulations & Industry 
Policy in the Trades 
 
Climbing and Material 
Handling: Lifting, Rigging 
and Hoisting 
       
  D  E  F 
  Hazardous Materials and 
Fire Protection  Welding Safety 
 
Oxyfuel Equipment and 
Cutting 
       
  G  H  I 
  Weld Faults  Hand Tools 
 
Power Tools 
       
  J     
  Arc Cutting and Gouging   
 
 
 
 
SECTION TWO 
  
Topics: 
        
Drafting, Drawings and 
Specifications   
  A  B  C 
  Welding Symbols  Fractions 
 
Decimals 
       
  D  E  F 
  Ratios, Percentage and 
Measurement Systems  Geometric Formulas 
 
Joint and Weld Types 
 
 
SECTION THREE 
  
Topics: 
        
Shielded Metal Arc 
Welding (SMAW) 
  A  B  C 
  SMAW Equipment  Mild Steel Electrodes 
 
SMAW Fillet Welds 
on Mild Steel 
 
 


=== PAGE 12 ===
 
- 9 - Classification: Public 
SECTION FOUR 
  
Topics: 
        
Gas Metal Arc Welding 
(GMAW), Flux-Cored Arc 
Welding (FCAW), Metal 
Cored Arc Welding 
(MCAW), and 
Submerged Arc Welding 
(SAW) 
  A  B  C 
  Wire Feed Welding 
Equipment Power Sources  Wire Feed Welding Filler 
Metals and Feeders 
 
Wire Feed Welding 
Shielding Gases 
       
  D  E  F 
  Wire Welding Maintenance 
and Troubleshooting  Submerged Arc Welding 
(SAW) 
 
GMAW on Mild Steel 
       
  G     
  FCAW and MCAW on Mild 
Steel   
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 13 ===
 
- 10 - Classification: Public 
PERIOD TWO COURSE CONTENT 
 
 
SECTION ONE 
  
Topics: 
        
Foundational Skills, 
Safety, Procedures and 
Property of Metals 
  A  B  C 
  Distortion  Oxyfuel Cutting on Mild 
Steel Plate 
 
Other Processes 
       
  D  E  F 
  Metal Identification  Hardfacing 
 
Aluminum and Aluminum 
Welding 
       
  G  H   
  Production of Metals  Carbon and Alloy Steels 
and Alloy Steel Filler Metals 
 
 
 
 
SECTION TWO 
  
Topics: 
        
Drafting, Drawings and 
Specifications   
  A  B  C 
  Drawing Interpretation  Pattern Development 
 
Layout 
       
  D  E   
  Estimating Principles  Project Estimating 
 
 
 
 
SECTION THREE 
  
Topics: 
        
Shielded Metal Arc 
Welding (SMAW) 
  A     
  SMAW Groove Welds on 
Mild Steel   
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 14 ===
 
- 11 - Classification: Public 
SECTION FOUR 
  
Topics: 
        
Gas Tungsten Arc 
Welding (GTAW) 
  A  B  C 
  The GTAW Process  GTAW Electrodes, Filler 
Metals and Shielding Gases 
 
GTAW Equipment 
Maintenance and 
Troubleshooting 
       
  D  E  F 
  GTAW on Mild Steel  GTAW on Aluminum 
 
GTAW on Stainless Steel 
 
 
SECTION FIVE 
  
Topics: 
        
Gas Metal Arc Welding 
(GMAW), Flux-Cored Arc 
Welding (FCAW), Metal 
Cored Arc Welding 
(MCAW), and 
Submerged Arc Welding 
(SAW) 
  A  B  C 
  GMAW on Aluminum  
GMAW, FCAW and 
MCAW Groove Welds on 
Mild Steel 
 
GMAW, FCAW 
and MCAW on Mild 
Steel Pipe 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 15 ===
 
- 12 - Classification: Public 
PERIOD THREE COURSE CONTENT 
 
 
SECTION ONE 
  
Topics: 
        
Foundational Skills, 
Safety and Procedures 
  A  B  C 
  Codes, Standards and Red 
Seal Certification  Oxyfuel Cutting on Mild 
Steel 
 
Workplace Coaching Skills 
 
 
SECTION TWO 
  
Topics: 
        
Properties of Metals 
  A  B  C 
  Heat Treatment  Stainless Steel 
 
Nickel Alloys and Clad 
Steels 
       
  D  E  F 
  Applied Metallurgy and 
Metal Identification  Non-Destructive Testing 
 
Destructive Testing 
 
 
SECTION THREE 
  
Topics: 
        
Drafting, Drawings and 
Specifications   
  A  B  C 
  Structural Drawings  Pressure Vessel Drawings 
 
Piping Drawings 
 
 
SECTION FOUR 
  
Topics: 
        
Shielded Metal Arc 
Welding (SMAW) 
  A  B   
  SMAW on Mild Steel  SMAW on Mild Steel Pipe 
 
 
 
 
SECTION FIVE 
  
Topics: 
        
Gas Tungsten Arc 
Welding (GTAW) 
  A     
  GTAW on Mild Steel Plate 
and Pipe   
 
 
 

=== PAGE 16 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 13 - Classification: Public 
 
Period One 
Course Content 
 
(8 weeks – 240 hours) 
 
Section Title 
Weighting 
Hours % 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety and Procedures 70 hrs 29% 
Section Two: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications 40 hrs 17% 
Section Three: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 43 hrs 18% 
Section Four: 
Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW), 
Flux-Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), 
Metal Cored Arc Welding (MCAW), and 
Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) 
87 hrs 36% 
TOTAL  240 hrs 100% 
 
 
 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety and Procedures 
 
 
 
Topic A. Welder Apprenticeship Training Program Orientation 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to explain how welder apprenticeship training 
works in Alberta, including curriculum and attendance expectations, contract and portfolio 
responsibilities, employment sectors, and external organizations affecting the trade. 
Objectives: 1. Explain the Welder curriculum guide learning outcomes and objectives. 
2. Describe the responsibilities for the contract of apprenticeship and competency portfolio by the 
apprentice, sponsor and Alberta Apprenticeship and Industry Training.  
3. Identify industrial, commercial and construction fields that provide employment opportunities for 
welders. 
4. Define the role of external organizations that affect the welding trade. 
 
 
 
This section establishes entry-level readiness for welding work by covering apprenticeship 
orientation, OHS safety and regulations, rigging/material handling, and hazardous 
materials/fire protection, then building hands-on skills in oxyfuel equipment setup and 
cutting, tool use, arc cutting/gouging, and weld fault identification. 


=== PAGE 17 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 14 - Classification: Public 
Topic B. Safety, Legislation, Regulations and Industry Policy in the 
Trades 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to apply the legislation, regulations, and industry 
practices required for safe work in this trade by completing hazard assessment and control, 
following emergency procedures, and selecting, maintaining, and using required PPE in 
accordance with OHS and related requirements. 
Objectives: 1. Demonstrate the application of the Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Act, Regulation and 
Code. 
2. Describe the sponsor’s and employee’s role with OHS regulations, Worksite Hazardous 
Materials Information Systems (WHMIS), fire regulations, Workers Compensation Board (WCB) 
regulations and related advisory bodies and agencies. 
3. Describe and comply with industry practices for hazard assessment and control procedures.  
4. Describe the responsibilities of worker and sponsors to apply emergency procedures.  
5. Describe tradesperson attitudes with respect to housekeeping, personal protective equipment 
(PPE) and emergency procedures. 
6. Describe the roles and responsibilities of sponsors and employees with the selection and use of 
PPE.  
7. Maintain required PPE for tasks. 
8. Use required PPE for tasks. 
 
 
Topic C. Climbing and Material Handling: Lifting, Rigging and Hoisting 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to apply correct climbing, lifting, rigging, and 
hoisting practices by following material handling and storage procedures, calculating load weight 
and centre of gravity, verifying sling and rope capacity limits, and using lifting and rigging 
equipment. 
Objectives: 1. Climbing, lifting, rigging and hoisting safety.  
2. Identify procedures for handling and storing materials. 
3. Determine weight and centre of gravity of loads. 
4. Identify the load limits of wire rope and synthetic slings. 
5. Describe the use of plate clamps and cable clips. 
 
 
Topic D. Hazardous Materials and Fire Protection 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to safely apply hazardous materials and fire 
protection practices by using handling, storage, transport, and venting procedures, and by 
identifying fire hazards/classes and using appropriate fire protection equipment. 
Objectives: 1. Describe handling, storing and transporting procedures for hazardous material.  
2. Describe venting procedures when working with hazardous materials. 
3. Describe hazards, classes, procedures and equipment related to fire protection. 

=== PAGE 18 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 15 - Classification: Public 
 
Topic E. Welding Safety 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to apply safe work practices during welding and 
cutting operations to identify hazards, select and use PPE, apply controls for welding fumes and 
gases, use electrical safety precautions, and follow procedures for work in confined spaces or 
potentially dangerous enclosures. 
Objectives: 1. Identify hazards for welding and cutting operations. 
2. Identify the use of personal protective equipment for welding and cutting operations. 
3. Explain the hazards and controls involved with welding fumes and gases. 
4. Explain the effects of electricity and precautions used to prevent injury. 
5. Describe the procedure for welding or cutting in confined spaces or potentially dangerous 
enclosures. 
 
 
Topic F. Oxyfuel Equipment and Cutting 
Weighting 
37 Hours 15% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to assemble, adjust, operate, shut down, and 
maintain oxyfuel equipment; perform hand-held and machine oxyfuel cuts on mild steel plate, pipe, 
and structural shapes. 
Objectives: 1. Identify causes and preventive measures for backfires, flashbacks and burn backs.  
2. Describe how to operate a hand-held oxyfuel cutting torch on mild steel plate and structural 
shapes. 
3. Describe the characteristics and handling procedures for oxygen and fuel gases. 
4. Describe the functions of oxyfuel equipment components. 
5. Explain the procedure for placement, set-up and shutting down of oxyfuel equipment. 
6. Demonstrate the use, care and maintenance of oxyfuel equipment components. 
7. Describe pressure and flame adjustments. 
8. Perform straight line, bevel, and shape cutting on mild steel.  
9. Pierce and cut holes in mild steel plate. 
10. Cope 3/8 in. mild steel to fit a 100 mm (4 in.) C shape. 
11. Perform cuts on structural shapes. 
12. Operate a machine oxyfuel cutting torch on mild steel plate and pipe. 
 
 
Topic G. Weld Faults 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to define classifications of weld faults, identify 
weld faults, their causes, and methods of prevention. 
Objectives: 1. Define the classifications of weld faults. 
2. Identify weld faults, their causes and methods of prevention.  

=== PAGE 19 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 16 - Classification: Public 
 
Topic H. Hand Tools 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe required safety precautions and 
identify layout, measuring, clamping, cutting, and other hand tools. 
Objectives: 1. Describe safety precautions for hand tools. 
2. Identify the layout and measuring tools and their uses. 
3. Identify clamping tools and their uses.  
4. Identify cutting tools and their uses. 
5. Identify the other hand tools used by welders. 
 
 
Topic I. Power Tools 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to demonstrate the operation of grinders, 
describe the operation of drills, metal forming/shaping, metal cutting tools, and the use of power 
positioners. 
Objectives: 1. Demonstrate the operation of grinders.  
2. Describe the operation of drills.  
3. Describe the operation of metal forming and shaping tools.  
4. Describe the operation for metal cutting tools. 
5. Describe the use of power positioners. 
 
 
Topic J. Arc Cutting and Gouging 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to apply safe work practices during cutting 
operations to identify hazards, select and use PPE. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the plasma arc cutting process and equipment.  
2. Demonstrate plasma arc cutting.  
3. Describe the carbon arc cutting process and equipment.  
4. Demonstrate carbon arc cutting. 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 20 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 17 - Classification: Public 
Section Two: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications 
 
 
 
Topic A. Weld Symbols 
Weighting 
6 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to explain the purpose of welding symbols, define 
and interpret weld, welding, and supplementary symbols; interpret NDT symbols. 
Objectives: 1. Explain the purpose of welding symbols.  
2. Define weld, welding, and supplementary symbols.  
3. Interpret weld, welding, and supplementary symbols.  
4. Identify the dimensioning of welding symbols.  
5. Interpret NDT symbols. 
 
 
Topic B. Fractions 
Weighting 
8 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify key fraction terms and concepts, use 
practical fractions on a tape measure, and solve fraction problems. 
Objectives: 1. Identify terms and concepts used with fractions. 
2. Use practical fractions on a tape measure.  
3. Solve problems using fractions. 
 
 
Topic C. Decimals 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to convert fractions to decimals, and decimals to 
fractions to solve practical problems. 
Objectives: 1. Round decimal fractions to specified place values.  
2. Add, subtract, multiply and divide decimal fractions.  
3. Convert fractions to decimals.  
4. Convert decimal inches and decimal feet, to feet and inch fractions with a practical denominator. 
5. Solve decimal fraction calculations. 
 
 
 
This section covers weld and Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) symbols, essential trades 
math and measurement, and basic joint and weld types for interpreting fabrication 
requirements. 


=== PAGE 21 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 18 - Classification: Public 
Topic D. Ratios, Percentage and Measurement Systems 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to solve problems using ratios, proportions, and 
percentages; identify and convert between fractions, decimals, percentages, and units of measure. 
Objectives: 1. Convert between fractions, decimals and percentages.  
2. Solve percentage problems.  
3. Calculate ratio problems: two quantities in the form of a ratio and two ratios in the form of a 
proportion. 
4. Identify metric units of measure.  
5. Convert imperial units: feet to inches, square inches to square feet, and cubic measures to 
gallons.  
6. Convert between units of measure. 
 
 
Topic E. Geometric Formulas 
Weighting 
12 Hours 5% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to apply geometric formulas and perform 
calculations to solve problems. 
Objectives: 1. Identify formulas and solve problems for perimeter, area and volume.  
2. Calculate the weight of a solid.  
3. Calculate the capacity of a container in gallons and liters. 
 
 
Topic F. Joint and Weld Types 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify joint and weld types; describe weld 
dimensions and variations. 
Objectives: 1. Identify the five basic joints.  
2. Describe the types of welds and their dimensions. 
3. Identify joint and weld type variations. 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 22 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 19 - Classification: Public 
Section Three: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. SMAW Equipment 
Weighting 
8 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify SMAW equipment and power sources 
and explain key concepts. 
Objectives: 1. Define SMAW related terms. 
2. Identify welding cables and accessories for welding power sources. 
3. Identify the effect of arc length on amperage and voltage. 
4. Describe AC and AC-DC rectified power sources.  
5. Describe AC and DC generator power sources.  
6. Describe multi-process inverter power sources. 
 
 
Topic B. Mild Steel Electrodes 
Weighting 
5 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and select mild steel SMAW 
electrodes. 
Objectives: 1. Define the terms associated with SMAW electrodes. 
2. Identify the CSA and AWS classification and specifications for SMAW electrodes.  
3. Identify the types and functions of SMAW electrode coatings.  
4. Describe the functions of the slag.  
5. Describe care, handling and storage procedures for these electrodes.  
6. Identify mild steel SMAW electrodes and their applications. 
 
 
Topic C. SMAW Fillet Welds on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 13% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform SMAW welds on mild steel in the 
required positions. 
Objectives: 1. Perform surface welds in the flat position using E4310 (E6010) and E4918 (E7018) electrodes.  
2. Perform fillet welds in the 1F, 2F, 3F and 4F positions using E4310 (E6010) and E4918 (E7018) 
electrodes. 
 
 
This section covers SMAW equipment and electrodes, then builds hands-on skills to 
produce welds on mild steel in the required positions. 


=== PAGE 23 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 20 - Classification: Public 
 
Section Four: Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW), Flux-Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), 
Metal Cored Arc Welding (MCAW), and Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. Wire Feed Welding Equipment Power Sources 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe wire feed welding 
equipment. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the principles of operation of wire feed welding equipment.  
2. Identify the components of a wire feed welding equipment set-up.  
3. Describe wire feed welding equipment power sources and wire feeders. 
4. Identify advantages and disadvantages of wire feed processes. 
 
 
Topic B. Wire Feed Welding Filler Metals and Feeders 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe wire feed consumables 
and feeder components. 
Objectives: 1. Identify wire feed welding equipment filler metals.  
2. Describe the modes of metal transfer.  
3. Describe wire feed drive systems and gun and cable accessories.  
4. Describe wire feed operating variables. 
 
 
Topic C. Wire Feed Welding Shielding Gases 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify shielding gases and supply systems 
for wire feed processes. 
Objectives: 1. Identify shielding gases for wire feed processes.  
2. Identify shielding gas supply systems. 
 
 
 
This section covers wire-feed welding setup and troubleshooting and builds hands-on 
skills to perform GMAW/FCAW/MCAW welds on mild steel in required positions. 


=== PAGE 24 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 21 - Classification: Public 
Topic D. Wire Feed Welding Maintenance and Troubleshooting 
Weighting 
6 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to set up, maintain, and troubleshoot wire feed 
welding equipment. 
Objectives: 1. Demonstrate the set-up and maintenance required for wire feed drive systems and gun 
assemblies.  
2. Perform corrective measures for malfunctioning wire process equipment.  
3. Describe the effects of angle and inclination. 
 
 
Topic E. Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe the components, 
consumables, and operation of the SAW process. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the operating principles of SAW.  
2. Identify the components of SAW.  
3. Describe SAW power sources and equipment.  
4. Describe SAW operating variables.  
5. Identify SAW filler metals and fluxes. 
6. Identify advantages and disadvantages of SAW. 
 
 
Topic F. GMAW on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 12% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GMAW welds on mild steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform stringer and weave beads in the flat and horizontal positions.  
2. Perform welds in 1F, 2F, and 3F positions.  
3. Perform welds in 1G, 2G, 3G positions. 
 
 
Topic G. FCAW and MCAW on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 12% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform FCAW and demonstrate MCAW 
welding on mild steel. 

=== PAGE 25 ===
PERIOD ONE 
 
- 22 - Classification: Public 
Topic G. FCAW and MCAW on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 12% 
Objectives: 1. Perform stringer and weave beads in the flat and horizontal positions using FCAW on mild steel 
plate. 
2. Perform welds in 1F, 2F and 3F positions using FCAW process.  
3. Demonstrate MCAW process.  
4. Perform welds in 1GF, 2G, 3GF and 4GF joint configurations using FCAW process with a 
backing plate. 

=== PAGE 26 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 23 - Classification: Public 
 
Period Two 
Course Content 
 
(8 weeks – 240 hours) 
 
Section Title 
Weighting 
Hours % 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety, Procedures and 
Properties of Metals 39 hrs 16% 
Section Two: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications 51 hrs 21% 
Section Three: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 40 hrs 17% 
Section Four: Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 56 hrs 23% 
Section Five: 
Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW), 
Flux-Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), 
Metal Cored Arc Welding (MCAW), and 
Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) 
54 hrs 23% 
TOTAL  240 hrs 100% 
 
 
 
 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety, Procedures and Properties of Metals 
 
 
 
Topic A. Distortion 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify the types, causes, and control methods 
of welding distortion. 
Objectives: 1. Identify how heat and temperature relate to distortion. 
2. Identify the three types of distortion, their causes and control of each type. 
 
 
 
This section covers welding skills, metal properties, and an overview of other processes. 


=== PAGE 27 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 24 - Classification: Public 
Topic B. Oxyfuel Cutting on Mild Steel Plate 
Weighting 
20 Hours 8% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform oxyfuel cutting on mild steel plate. 
Objectives: 1. Perform piercing and cutting of an elliptical opening. 
2. Perform a cope on 10 mm (3/8 in.) mild steel to fit a 100 mm (4 in.) C shape and complete a 30° 
bevel. 
 
 
Topic C. Other Processes 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe other welding-related processes and 
their applications. 
Objectives: 1. Describe robotics, handheld laser beam welding, resistance spot welding, thermite, friction stir 
welding, and 3D metal printing. 
 
 
Topic D. Metal Identification 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe metals by their physical 
and mechanical properties. 
Objectives: 1. Identify metals by physical and mechanical properties. 
2. Describe chip, spark, file hardness and flame tests. 
3. Describe the mechanical properties of metals. 
4. Describe the physical properties of metals. 
 
 
Topic E. Hardfacing 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe and identify hardfacing applications, 
procedures, and consumables. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the hardfacing process and applications. 
2. Identify the types of wear. 
3. Identify filler metals for hardfacing.  
4. Identify the problems associated with hardfacing and how to avoid them. 
5. Describe the procedures for applying hardfacing materials with filler wires. 
 

=== PAGE 28 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 25 - Classification: Public 
Topic F. Aluminum and Aluminum Welding 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe aluminum properties and welding 
principles, including alloy designations. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the physical and chemical properties of aluminum versus steel. 
2. Describe how physical and chemical properties affect the welding of aluminum.  
3. Describe the Aluminum Association numerical designation for casting alloys and wrought 
aluminum.  
4. Describe the effects of welding on heat treatable and non-heat treatable alloys.  
5. Identify the filler metals used for welding aluminum. 
 
 
Topic G. Production of Metals 
Weighting 
3 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe the production processes and types 
of iron and steel. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the production processes for iron and steel. 
2. Describe the types of iron and steel. 
 
 
Topic H. Carbon and Alloy Steels and Alloy Steel Filler Metals 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe carbon and alloy steels 
and their properties. 
Objectives: 1. Identify the carbon content and the uses for low, medium and high carbon steel.  
2. Describe the effects of carbon content on the weldability of steel.  
3. Identify the effects of elements in the properties of carbon steel. 
4. Identify the alloying elements in alloy steels. 
5. Identify the types, properties and weldability of low alloy steels.  
6. Identify the properties and weldability of high strength low alloy steels. 
7. Identify alloy steel filler material classifications using AWS and CSA specifications.  
8. Identify low alloy steel filler metals and their applications. 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 29 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 26 - Classification: Public 
Section Two: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications   
 
 
 
Topic A. Drawing Interpretation 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to interpret drawings. 
Objectives: 1. Identify the alphabet of lines. 
2. Describe the purpose of drawings.  
3. Identify elements and information found on drawings.  
4. Interpret symbols, views and sections used on drawings. 
5. Identify metric and imperial dimensioning. 
 
 
Topic B. Pattern Development 
Weighting 
22 Hours 8% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe drawing tools and 
methods for pattern development; perform layouts. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the principles of scale drawings.  
2. Describe the principles of perspective, oblique and isometric drawings.  
3. Describe and sketch orthographic projection.  
4. Develop an orthographic drawing to scale.  
5. Describe drawing tools.  
6. Describe the parts of geometric shapes and angles. 
7. Perform layouts. 
 
 
Topic C. Layout 
Weighting 
12 Hours 5% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify, describe, and perform layout 
procedures. 
Objectives: 1. Describe layout abbreviations and symbols. 
2. Describe layout tools and mark-up methods. 
3. Describe templates. 
4. Describe the procedure for plate utilization. 
5. Identify pipe sizes and schedules. 
 
This section builds skills to create and interpret drawings, apply layout methods, and 
complete job estimates. 


=== PAGE 30 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 27 - Classification: Public 
Topic C. Layout 
Weighting 
12 Hours 5% 
6. Describe pipe layout tools. 
7. Perform layout for plate and pipe. 
 
 
Topic D. Estimating Principles 
Weighting 
6 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to demonstrate skills related to estimating. 
Objectives: 1. Convert angular measurements to linear dimensions. 
2. Calculate the cost of steel. 
 
 
Topic E. Project Estimating 
Weighting 
9 Hours 4% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to develop a project estimate. 
Objectives: 1. Determine total costs for a project. 
2. Develop a project estimate. 
 
 
 
Section Three: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. SMAW Groove Welds on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
40 Hours 17% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform SMAW groove welds on mild steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform welds in the 1G, 2G, 3G using E4310 (E6010) root and E4918 (E7018) fill and cap. 
2. Perform welds in the 1GF, 2G, 3GF using E4918 (E7018) with backing plate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This section develops hands-on skills in SMAW groove welding on mild steel. 


=== PAGE 31 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 28 - Classification: Public 
Section Four: Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. The GTAW Process 
Weighting 
5 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe GTAW procedures and 
fundamentals. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the GTAW process and applications. 
2. Describe advantages and disadvantages of the GTAW process. 
3. Identify hazards and protective measures associated with GTAW. 
4. Describe single-phase and three-phase power. 
5. Identify components of a GTAW workstation. 
6. Describe types of GTAW power sources. 
7. Identify AC, DC, and high frequency welding currents used in GTAW. 
8. Describe torch assemblies. 
9. Describe gas regulators and flow meters. 
 
 
Topic B. GTAW Electrodes, Filler Metals and Shielding Gases 
Weighting 
7 Hours 3% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe GTAW electrodes, filler 
metals, and shielding gases. 
Objectives: 1. Identify electrode designations and explain their applications. 
2. Identify the function of the filler metals in GTAW. 
3. Identify filler metals by AWS and CSA designations and explain their applications. 
4. Describe the care and preparation of electrodes and filler metals. 
5. Identify the function of the electrode in GTAW. 
6. Describe the types and applications of shielding gases used in GTAW. 
7. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of various shielding gases. 
 
 
Topic C. GTAW Equipment Maintenance and Troubleshooting 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to troubleshoot and maintain GTAW equipment. 
 
This section introduces GTAW fundamentals, equipment, consumables, and 
troubleshooting; develop hands-on skills. 


=== PAGE 32 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 29 - Classification: Public 
Topic C. GTAW Equipment Maintenance and Troubleshooting 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Objectives: 1. Describe the set up and maintenance of GTAW equipment. 
2. Determine and solve power source output current problems. 
3. Determine and solve GTAW torch and cable assembly problems. 
4. Determine and solve shielding gas coverage problems. 
 
 
Topic D. GTAW on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 12% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GTAW on mild steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform touch start, lift start and high frequency methods. 
2. Perform stringer beads in the flat position on mild steel gauge plate.  
3.  Perform joint preparation for GTAW on mild steel gauge plate.  
4. Perform 1F, 2F, 3F welds on mild steel gauge plate. 
5. Perform 1G, 2G, 3G welds on plate and 2G, 5G welds on pipe. 
 
 
Topic E. GTAW on Aluminum 
Weighting 
5 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GTAW on aluminum. 
Objectives: 1. Perform stringer beads in the flat position on aluminum gauge plate. 
2. Perform 1F, 2F, 3F welds on aluminum gauge plate. 
 
 
Topic F. GTAW on Stainless Steel 
Weighting 
5 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GTAW on stainless steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform 2F, 3F welds on stainless steel gauge plate. 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 33 ===
PERIOD TWO 
 
- 30 - Classification: Public 
Section Five: Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW), Flux-Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), 
Metal Cored Arc Welding (MCAW), and Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. GMAW on Aluminum 
Weighting 
2 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GMAW on aluminum. 
Objectives: 1. Perform stringer and weave beads in the flat and horizontal positions. 
2. Perform 1F, 2F, 3F welds. 
 
Topic B. GMAW, FCAW and MCAW Groove Welds on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
40 Hours 17% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GMAW, FCAW, and MCAW groove 
welds on mild steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform 1G, 2G, 3G welds on mild steel using GMAW root, and FCAW or MCAW fill and cap. 
2. Demonstrate welds with MCAW. 
3. Perform 3G GMAW root and 4G fill and cap with FCAW. 
 
Topic C. GMAW, FCAW and MCAW on Mild Steel Pipe 
Weighting 
12 Hours 5% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform GMAW, FCAW, MCAW pipe welding. 
Objectives: 
 
1. Perform 2G weld on pipe using GMAW. 
2. Perform 1GR weld on pipe using a GMAW root pass and FCAW or MCAW fill and cap. 
3. Perform 2G weld on pipe using GMAW root pass and FCAW fill and cap. 
4. Perform 5G weld on pipe using a downhill root pass, and an uphill fill and cap. 
 
This section introduces GMAW, FCAW, MCAW with hands-on welding on aluminum and 
mild steel plate and pipe. 


=== PAGE 34 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 31 - Classification: Public 
 
Period Three 
Course Content 
 
(8 weeks – 240 hours) 
 
Section Title 
Weighting 
Hours % 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety and Procedures 44 hrs 18% 
Section Two: Properties of Metals 26 hrs 11% 
Section Three: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications 48 hrs 20% 
Section Four: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 82 hrs 34% 
Section Five: Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 40 hrs 17% 
TOTAL  240 hrs 100% 
 
 
 
 
Section One: Foundational Skills, Safety and Procedures 
 
 
 
Topic A. Codes, Standards and Red Seal Certification 
Weighting 
12 Hours 5% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe welding codes and 
standards and use Red Seal resources to prepare for the Interprovincial exam. 
Objectives: 1. Define the terms code, standard and specification. 
2. Identify the advantages of standardization. 
3. Identify agencies that set codes and standards. 
4. Identify the codes that govern welding. 
5. Describe the welding procedure qualification. 
6. Describe the welder performance qualification. 
7. Use the Red Seal Occupational Standard (RSOS) to prepare for an Interprovincial examination. 
 
This section builds core readiness for welder training in the workplace, including codes, 
standards, and Red Seal exam preparation; develop oxyfuel cutting skills on mild steel, 
and introduce workplace coaching practices. 


=== PAGE 35 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 32 - Classification: Public 
 
 
Topic B. Oxyfuel Cutting on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
30 Hours 13% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform oxyfuel cutting procedures on mild 
steel. 
Objectives: 1. Perform oxyfuel bevel cutting on mild steel. 
2. Perform piercing, cutting, and coping on mild steel. 
 
 
Topic C. Workplace Coaching Skills 
Weighting 
2 Hours 0% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe and apply the workplace coaching 
process. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the process and skills for coaching an apprentice, including setting expectations, 
demonstrating tasks, observing performance, and providing feedback. 
. 
 
 
 
Section Two: Properties of Metals 
 
 
 
 
Topic A. Heat Treatment 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to define and describe heat treatment 
fundamentals. 
Objectives: 2. Define heat-affected zones in metals. 
3. Describe the difference between heat and temperature. 
4. Describe the three forms of heat transfer. 
5. Describe the effects of expansion and contraction. 
6. Describe the purpose and effects of preheat and postheat. 
7. Describe the practices of heat treatment. 
8. Describe the principle of temperature-indicating devices. 
 
 
 
This section provides an overview of metal properties, metallurgy, and testing methods. 


=== PAGE 36 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 33 - Classification: Public 
Topic B. Stainless Steel 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe stainless steels and 
related welding procedures. 
Objectives: 1. Describe stainless steel.  
2. Identify types of stainless steel and their properties. 
3. Identify the AISI numbering system of stainless steel. 
4. Identify carbide precipitation and ways of overcoming this problem. 
5. Identify the major types of stainless steel filler materials and AWS specifications. 
6. Describe handling and storage of stainless steel electrodes and filler materials. 
7. Describe the handling procedures and preparation for welding stainless steel. 
 
 
Topic C. Nickel Alloys and Clad Steels 
Weighting 
4 Hours 1% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to describe nickel alloys, clad steels, and select 
filler metals. 
Objectives: 1. Describe nickel and its alloys. 
2. Describe clad steels and their advantages. 
3. Select filler metals in AWS specifications. 
4. Describe preparation and welding procedures for clad steels. 
 
 
Topic D. Applied Metallurgy and Metal Identification 
Weighting 
6 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify space-lattice types and describe grain 
growth and grain structure associated with welding. 
Objectives: 1. Identify space-lattice types in metals. 
2. Describe dendritic grain growth. 
3. Describe grain structure differences in metals. 
4. Identify changes in grain structure that result from welding. 
5. Interpret information supplied on mill test reports. 
 
 
Topic E. Non-Destructive Testing 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe NDT methods and their 
uses. 

=== PAGE 37 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 34 - Classification: Public 
Topic E. Non-Destructive Testing 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Objectives: 1. Identify NDT. 
2. Describe visual inspection techniques. 
 
 
Topic F. Destructive Testing (DT) 
Weighting 
4 Hours 2% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to identify and describe DT methods. 
Objectives: 1. Identify types of DT. 
2. Describe DT methods. 
 
 
 
 
Section Three: Drafting, Drawings and Specifications   
 
 
 
Topic A. Structural Drawings 
Weighting 
16 Hours 6% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to analyze, identify, and interpret structural 
drawings. 
Objectives: 1. Interpret abbreviations used on drawings. 
2. Identify site plans, benchmarks and orientation. 
3. Identify structural shapes and how they are specified. 
4. Identify types of structural drawings. 
5. Extract dimensions and other information from drawings. 
6. Interpret bill of materials for drawings. 
7. Interpret drawings. 
 
 
Topic B. Pressure Vessel Drawings 
Weighting 
16 Hours 7% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to analyze, identify, and interpret pressure vessel 
drawings. 
 
This section focuses on interpreting structural, pressure vessel, and piping drawings.  


=== PAGE 38 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 35 - Classification: Public 
Topic B. Pressure Vessel Drawings 
Weighting 
16 Hours 7% 
Objectives: 1. Identify external and internal vessel components. 
2. Identify material compositions as per code requirements on mill certification. 
3. Interpret vessel drawings. 
 
 
Topic C. Piping Drawings 
Weighting 
16 Hours 7% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to analyze, identify, and interpret piping 
drawings. 
Objectives: 1. Describe the purpose of a spool sheet. 
2. Interpret symbols that represent individual components on a spool sheet. 
3. Interpret position and orientation of piping systems from an isometric drawing. 
4. Interpret component sizes in a piping system from a spool sheet. 
5. Develop isometric drawings from orthographic projections. 
6. Develop a material list for a piping system. 
7. Interpret pipe drawings. 
 
 
 
 
Section Four: Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. SMAW on Mild Steel 
Weighting 
50 Hours 21% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform SMAW groove welds on mild steel 
plate. 
Objectives: 1. Perform 2G, 3G, 45° overhead and 4G welds using E4310 (E6010) for the root pass and E4918 
(E7018) for the fill and cap. 
2. Perform 4GF weld using E4918 (E7018) with backing according to CSA Standard W47.1. 
 
 
 
This section develops SMAW groove weld skills on mild steel plate and pipe. 


=== PAGE 39 ===
PERIOD THREE 
 
- 36 - Classification: Public 
Topic B. SMAW on Mild Steel Pipe 
Weighting 
32 Hours 13% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to perform SMAW groove welds on mild steel 
pipe.  
Objectives: 1. Demonstrate preparation, fit up, and tack weld pipe. 
2. Perform feathering on tack welds. 
3. Perform groove weld on 150 mm (6 in.) schedule 80 pipe in the 2G-5G positions using an E4310 
(E6010) root and E4918 (E7018) fill and cap. 
4. Perform groove weld on pipe in the 5G position downhill. 
 
 
 
 
Section Five: Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 
 
 
 
Topic A. GTAW on Mild Steel Plate and Pipe 
Weighting 
40 Hours 17% 
Outcome:  Upon successful completion, learners will be able to prepare, fit-up, and weld using GTAW and 
SMAW on mild steel plate and pipe. 
Objectives: 1. Demonstrate preparation and fit-up for GTAW. 
2. Perform 1G and 2G welds on mild steel plate. 
3. Perform 3G weld on mild steel plate using GTAW root and SMAW E4918 (E7018) fill and cap, 
uphill for all passes. 
4. Perform 2G, 5G and 6G welds on mild steel pipe. 
 
 
This section develops GTAW skills on mild steel plate and pipe. 


=== PAGE 40 ===
 
 
- 37 - Classification: Public 
 
 
Taxonomy 
Verb List 
 
 
This is a list of commons verbs used to demonstrate the level and/or complexity of a given taxonomy.   
It is only intended as a guide and is not meant to exclude additional verbs. 
 
Taxonomy I 
 Verbs   
 Convert  Define 
 Describe  Explain 
 Identify  List 
 Recognize  State 
 
Taxonomy II 
 Verbs   
 Apply  Connect 
 Demonstrate  Draw 
 Extract  Locate 
 Maintain  Perform 
 Select  Splice 
 Tap  Terminate 
 Use   
 
Taxonomy III 
 Verbs   
 Analyze  Calculate 
 Create  Determine 
 Develop  Interpret 
 Program  Solve 
 Troubleshoot  Verify 


=== PAGE 41 ===
 
 
 Classification: Public 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
