

=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Red Seal 
Occupational 
Standard 
Welder

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Red Seal 
Occupational 
Standard 
 
Welder  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


=== PAGE 3 ===
 
3  
 
Title: Welder  
This publication is available for download at canada.ca/publicentre -ESDC. It is also available upon request in multiple 
formats (large print, Braille, MP3, audio CD, e -text CD, DAISY, or Accessible PDF), by contacting 1 800 O -Canada 
(1-800-622-6232). By teletypewriter  (TTY), call 1 -800-926-9105. 
© His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, 2023  
For information regarding reproduction rights: droitdauteur.copyright@HRSDC -RHDCC.gc.ca. 
PDF 
Cat. No.: Em15-3/41-2023E-PDF 
ISBN/ISSN: 978-0-660-48919-3 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
4  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Foreword 
The Canadian Council of Directors of Apprenticeship (CCDA) recognizes this Red Seal 
Occupational Standard (RSOS) as the Red Seal standard for the Welder trade. 
Background 
The first National Conference on Apprenticeship in Trades and Industries, held in Ottawa in 1952, 
recommended that the federal government be requested to cooperate with provincial and territorial 
apprenticeship committees and officials in preparing analyses of a number of skilled occupations. 
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) funds the Red Seal Program, which, under the 
guidance of the CCDA, develops a national occupational standard for each of the Red Seal trades.  
Standards have the following objectives:  
• to describe and group the tasks performed by skilled workers;  
• to identify which tasks are performed in every province and territory;  
• to develop instruments for use in the preparation of Interprovincial Red Seal Examinations and 
assessment tools for apprenticeship and certification authorities; 
• to develop common tools for apprenticeship on -the-job and technical training in Canada;  
• to facilitate the mobility of apprentices and skilled workers in Canada;  
• to supply employers, employees, associations, industries, training institutions and governments 
with occupational standards.  
Any questions, comments, or suggestions for changes, corrections, or revisions to this standard or any of 
its related products may be forwarded to:  
Trades and Apprenticeship Division  
Apprenticeship and Sectoral Initiatives Directorate  
Employment and Social Development Canada  
140 Promenade du Portage, Phase IV  
Gatineau, Quebec K1A 0J9  
  

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
5  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Acknowledgements 
The CCDA and ESDC wish to express sincere appreciation for the contribution of the many 
tradespersons, industrial establishments, professional associations, labour organizations, provincial and 
territorial government departments and agencies, and all other s who contributed to this publication.  
Special thanks are offered to the following representatives who contributed greatly to the original draft of 
the standard and provided expert advice throughout its development:  
Shane Blanchard Newfoundland and Labrador  
Roxanne Brideau New Brunswick 
Rick Cheverie Prince Edward Island  
Mario Duhaime Quebec 
Mark Flynn British Columbia  
Brad Harder British Columbia  
Scott Krieg  Saskatchewan 
Walter Lacey Nova Scotia  
Donald LaPlante New Brunswick 
Ray Lemieux Ontario 
Dale McGavin Ontario 
James Scott McGhie  Manitoba 
Mark Robinson  Alberta 
Charles Small Prince Edward Island 
Sheldon St. Croix  Newfoundland and Labrador  
Doryan Unrau Manitoba 
Brad Zerr Saskatchewan 
This standard was prepared by the Apprenticeship and Sectoral Initiatives Directorate of ESDC. The 
coordinating, facilitating and processing of this standard were undertaken by employees of the standards 
development team of the Trades and Apprenticeship Division and of Newfoundland and Labrador, the 
host jurisdiction for this trade.  
  

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
6  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Structure of the Occupational Standard  
This standard contains the following sections:  
Methodology: an overview of the process for development, review, validation and weighting of the 
standard  
Description of the Welder Trade: an overview of the trade’s duties, work environment, job requirements, 
similar occupations and career progression  
Trends in the Welder Trade: some of the trends identified by industry as being the most important for 
workers in this trade  
Skills for Success Summary: an overview of how each of the skills for success (formerly called 
essential skills) is applied in this trade  
Roles and Opportunities for Skilled Trades in a Sustainable Future: an overarching description of 
how in the context of climate change, skilled trades play a large role in implementing solutions and 
adjusting to changes in the world. In addition to highlighting the importance of this awareness, the 
standard may also contain more details on activities, skills and knowledge elements that are specific to 
the trade 
Industry Expected Performance: description of the expectations regarding the level of performance of 
the tasks, including information related to specific codes, regulations and standards that must be 
observed  
Language Requirements: description of the language requirements for working and studying in this 
trade in Canada 
Pie Chart of Red Seal Examination Weightings: a graph which depicts the national percentages of 
exam questions assigned to the major work activities  
Task Matrix and Weightings: a chart which outlines graphically the major work activities, tasks and sub-
tasks of this standard and the national percentages of exam questions assigned to the major work 
activities and tasks  
Harmonization of Apprenticeship Training: the aspects of apprenticeship training that participating 
provinces and territories have agreed upon to substantively align apprenticeship systems across Canada 
Major Work Activity (MWA): the largest division within the standard that is comprised of a distinct set of 
trade activities  
Task: distinct actions that describe the activities within a major work activity  
Task Descriptor: a general description of the task  
Sub-task: distinct actions that describe the activities within a task  

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
7  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Skills: 
Performance Criteria: description of the activities that are done as the sub -task is 
performed  
Evidence of Attainment: proof that the activities of the sub -task meet the expected 
performance of a tradesperson who has reached journeyperson level  
Range of Variables: elements and examples (not all inclusive) that provide a more in -
depth description of a term used in the performance criteria and evidence of attainment  
Knowledge: 
Learning Outcomes: describes what should be learned relating to a sub -task while 
participating in technical or in -school training  
Learning Objectives: topics to be covered during technical or in-school training in order to 
meet the learning outcomes for the sub -task  
Range of Variables: elements and examples (not all inclusive) that provide a more in -
depth description of a term used in the learning outcomes and learning objectives  
Appendix A – Acronyms: a list of acronyms used in the standard with their full name  
Appendix B – Tools and Equipment / Outils et équipement: a bilingual non-exhaustive list of tools and 
equipment used in this trade  
Appendix C – Glossary / Glossaire: bilingual definitions or explanations of selected technical terms 
used in the standard  
  

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
8  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Methodology 
Development of the Standard 
A draft standard is developed by a broad group of trade representatives, including tradespeople, 
instructors and employers at a National Workshop led by a team of facilitators. This draft standard breaks 
down all the tasks performed in the occupation and describes the knowledge and abilities required for a 
tradesperson to demonstrate competence in the trade.  
Harmonization of Apprenticeship Training  
An analysis of all provinces’ and territories’ apprenticeship programs is performed and recommendations 
are made on harmonizing the name of the trade, the hours of training required and the number of levels 
of training. Provinces and territories consult with their respective industry stakeholders on these elements 
and revisions are discussed until consensus is reached. Following the development of the workshop draft 
of the RSOS, participants discuss and come to consensus on the sequence of training topics, as 
expressed in the new standard. Their sequencing recommendations are reviewed by stakeholders in 
participating provinces and territories and further discussions are convened to reach consensus and to 
identify any exceptions.  
Online Survey 
Stakeholders are asked to review and validate the activities described in the new standard via an online 
survey. These stakeholders are invited to participate in this consultation through apprenticeship 
authorities, as well as national stakeholder groups.  
Draft Review 
The RSOS development team forwards a copy of the standard to provincial and territorial authorities who 
consult with industry representatives to review it. Their recommendations are assessed and incorporated 
into the standard.  
Validation and Weighting  
Participating provinces and territories also consult with industry to validate and weight the document for 
the purpose of planning the makeup of the Red Seal Interprovincial Examination for the trade. They 
validate and weight the major work activities (MWA), tasks and sub -tasks, of the standard as follows:  
MWA Each jurisdiction assigns a percentage of questions to each MWA for an examination 
that would cover the entire trade.  
Tasks Each jurisdiction assigns a percentage of exam questions to each task within a MWA. 
Sub-tasks Each jurisdiction indicates, with a “yes” or “no”, whether or not each sub -task is 
performed by skilled workers within the occupation in its jurisdiction.  
The results of this exercise are submitted to the RSOS development team who then analyzes the data 
and incorporates it into the document. The RSOS provides the individual jurisdictional validation results 
as well as the national averages of all responses. The national averages for MWA and task weighting 
guide the Interprovincial Red Seal Examination plan for the trade.  
The validation of the RSOS is used to identify common core sub-tasks across Canada for the occupation. 
If at least 70% of the responding jurisdictions’ industry performs a sub -task, it shall be considered 
common core. Interprovincial Red Seal Examination questions are limited to the common core sub-tasks 
identified through this validation process.  
  

=== PAGE 9 ===
 
9  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Definitions for Validation and Weighting  
yes sub-task performed by qualified workers in the occupation in that province or 
territory 
no sub-task not performed by qualified workers in the occupation in that province or 
territory 
NV standard Not Validated by that province or territory  
ND trade Not Designated in a province or territory  
Not Common 
Core (NCC) 
sub-task, task or MWA performed less than 70% of responding jurisdictions; these 
will not be tested by the Interprovincial Red Seal Examination for the trade 
National 
Average % 
average percentage of questions assigned to each MWA and task in Interprovincial 
Red Seal Examination for the trade  
Provincial/Territorial Abbreviations 
NL Newfoundland and Labrador  
NS Nova Scotia  
PE Prince Edward Island  
NB New Brunswick 
QC Quebec 
ON Ontario 
MB Manitoba 
SK Saskatchewan 
AB Alberta 
BC British Columbia  
NT Northwest Territories 
YT Yukon Territory 
NU Nunavut 
  

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
10  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Description of the Welder Trade 
“Welder” is this trade’s official Red Seal occupational title approved by the CCDA. This standard covers 
tasks performed by welders.  
Welders permanently join pieces of metal by applying heat, using filler metal or fusion processes. They 
join parts being manufactured, build structures, repair damaged or worn parts and apply wear surfaces. 
They use various welding processes to join struct ural steel and metal in vessels, piping and other 
components. They also use various cutting and gouging processes as well as fabricate parts, tools, 
machines and equipment used in the construction and manufacturing industries.  They must be 
knowledgeable in  weld faults (discontinuities), how they happen and how to correct them.  
Welders may specialize in certain types of welding such as custom fabrication, ship building and repair, 
bridge building and repairs, marine infrastructure, aerospace, pressure vessels, pipeline, structural 
welding, and machinery and equipment repair. There is a large diversity of materials used and products 
manufactured, resulting in a greater range of processes and specializations.  
Welders may be self-employed contractors or be employed by companies such as fabrication shops, 
steel and platform manufacturers, refineries, mechanical contractors, transportation contractors (heavy 
machinery, aircraft, shipbuilding, railcar repair), and specialized welding shops. Their work may be 
performed outdoors or indoors, on land or in water, and travel may be required to jobs in remote 
locations.  
In order to meet high quality standards, welders require attributes such as good mechanical ability, 
manual dexterity, good vision, excellent hand-eye coordination, and the ability to concentrate on detail 
work. They should be able to work independently and as part of a team. They also require the ability to 
work efficiently and accurately, to visualize a finished product, to reason logically and to understand 
metallurgy. They must be able to read and understand fabrication drawings and a variety of differe nt 
prints depending on the industry.  
Occupational hazards in this trade include: sparks, gases, hazardous fumes, burns, heavy lifting, 
repetitive stress and exposure to ultra-violet and infra-red radiation. Environmental conditions may include 
working at heights, in confined spaces, in trench es and in extreme temperatures.  
With experience, welders may advance to positions such as lead hand, welding supervisor, welding 
inspector, welding engineer and project manager.  
This standard recognizes similarities or overlaps with the work of industrial mechanics (millwrights), sheet 
metal workers, steamfitters/pipefitters, metal fabricators (fitters), ironworkers and boilermakers. With 
additional training, welders can transfer their skills to these related trades.  
  

=== PAGE 11 ===
 
11  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Trends in the Welder Trade  
Technology, Tools and Equipment  
Modern tools are well engineered with ergonomics and safety in mind. Cordless (self -contained power 
supply) welding machines have been developed and are being introduced to the market allowing for 
various sources of battery power.  
There are increases in the use of computerized welding equipment, especially programmable welding 
stations with multiple integrated processes. Advanced user interfaces and software updates allow for finer 
adjustments and user control. They decrease user error by ensuring pre set parameters are followed. 
With the industry being more and more automated and streamlined, welders are required to have an 
increased comfort in working with technology.  
Robotics and automated welding are being used for a greater variety of applications such as large scale 
manufacturing as they become more affordable and smaller in size.  
AC aluminum pulse gas metal arc welding (GMAW) has features that are not available with DC GMAW 
welding. This process allows for increased travel speed and deposition rates, improves gap bridging and 
reduces chance of burn through.  
Products/Materials 
Having a good understanding of the various classifications of steel and consumables is becoming more 
important than ever. Demand is increasing for the welding of stainless steel and aluminum, among others. 
More ornamental metals are being used.  
Health and Safety 
Various studies have shown hazards related to the exposure to carcinogens in a variety of welding 
products such as grinding discs.  
With more alloy work, there is a greater need for respiratory and ventilation controls. There is a better 
understanding today of the effects of hexavalent chrome and manganese and the potential risk to human 
organs and as a result, control of welding fumes  is more stringent. There are improved breathing 
protection masks and full respirators. Increasingly, welders are using helmets (such as PAPR) that have a 
filtered air supply. Workplaces have seen improvements in fume extraction techniques and systems.  
To address health and safety issues, specific personnel are appointed and trained to support employees. 
Training such as confined space work, work at heights, WHMIS and overhead crane operation are now 
part of the training that most welders must have.  
Environmental 
There are number of environmental hazards and issues that are important in welding. Awareness of these 
hazards and how to mitigate and prevent them are often at the project management level of work, but the 
welding community should also be a part of efforts to improve practices. For example, there needs to be 
improved awareness of harmful emissions produced through consumables and how to manage disposal 
of rods/wire and emitted gases. Increasingly, clients are requesting site-specific and corporate plans and 
actions.  

=== PAGE 12 ===
 
12  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Legislative and Regulatory 
There have been revisions and evolution in legislation and regulations regarding the transport, use and 
safe storage of compressed gases and their containment cylinders. For welders who also have to go to 
the construction site, they must be up -to-date on t raining and certifications required in the field.  
The industry is heavily regulated regarding the scope of work. More and more, small welding shops need 
to employ project management employees knowledgeable in a multitude of legislative and regulatory 
mandates. 
  

=== PAGE 13 ===
 
13  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Skills for Success Summary 
Skills for Success are needed in a quickly changing world for work, learning and life. They are 
foundational for building other skills and important for effective social interaction. Everyone benefits from 
having these skills as they help individuals get a job, progress at their current job and change jobs. They 
also help individuals become active members of their community and succeed in learning.  
Through extensive research and consultations, the Government of Canada launched the new Skills for 
Success model renewing the previous Essential Skills framework to better reflect the needs of the current 
and future labour market.  
The summary presented here is based on existing Essential Skills profiles and will be updated to align 
with the new Skills for Success model  over time. 
Reading 
Welders read documents to understand and learn. They read WHMIS material to find out how to handle 
hazardous products, as welsl as equipment and safety manuals to understand safe operating procedures. 
They also read and interpret complex information found in drawings, codes and regulations.  
Document Use 
Welders refer to checklists to follow proper work procedures and to track the progress of projects. They 
interpret the significance of information found on various documents. They look for safety information on 
signs and project status on tags. They observe colours on pipes, lines and metals to determine their 
contents or grade. They refer to markings such as stamps, metal plates, or tags. They complete forms 
and reports such as invoices, time sheets or daily logs to record information. They interpret symbols and 
numbers found on drawings to determine material requirements and measurements as well as the 
welding process to be used and the type, size, location and position of welds. They also review 
engineering notes found on drawings, or welding procedures s pecifications (WPS) and welding 
procedures data sheets (WPDS).  
Writing 
For the most part, welders write minimal text. They fill in information in invoices, reports, time sheets and 
daily logs. They may have to complete accident and incident reports or write safety guidelines.  
Oral Communication  
Welders communicate with co-workers and others daily to give directions, ask for assistance, provide 
information and guidance, and discuss work assignments. They may give informal presentations or 
explain welding designs to customers. They may also coach and mentor apprentices by demonstrating 
and explaining work procedures and expectations.  
Welders often work in noisy environments caused by moving metal and machinery such as mobile 
equipment, grinders, hammers and sandblasters, which affects communication. Therefore, welders use 
hand signals to communicate whenever necessary, particularly fro m a distance.  

=== PAGE 14 ===
 
14  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Numeracy 
Welders measure degrees of angles, lengths of pipe and elevations. They use various formulas to 
calculate how to get the maximum number of pieces out of a length of pipe, the dimensions of structural 
members, the volume, diameter and circumferences of tank s when fabricating pieces for them, and 
offsets. They may work with the metric and imperial measurement systems and therefore must be able to 
convert between the two systems. Welders also use numerical estimation to estimate the quantity of 
consumables required, the weight of a load based on its size and density, and the cost of work based on 
material and labour requirements.  
Thinking  
Welders use problem solving skills to identify discrepancies in drawings. They troubleshoot problems with 
equipment and generate unique solutions depending on the situation.  
Welders use decision making skills to decide whether they have enough information to start the task 
immediately or whether they need to gather more information first. They decide on the most efficient use 
of materials and how to control the temperature dur ing the welding process to avoid metallurgical 
problems. They may also decide on the best way to approach a job in consultation with their supervisor 
and any work partners.  
Welders use planning skills to organize and set up their work area, gather materials and equipment, and 
work on alternative tasks if equipment is not available.  
Working with Others 
Welders mostly work independently within a team environment, which includes other welders, supervisors 
and other tradespeople such as steamfitters/pipefitters and metal fabricators (fitters), to plan work, 
confirm calculations and to schedule the sharing of equipment. They may coach and receive assistance 
from apprentices. They may also be partnered with someone from  another trade, such as a 
steamfitter/pipefitter or metal fabricator (fitter), to coordinate their tasks on projects so that steps are 
completed in the correct order.  
Digital Technology 
Welders may use computers for research, data entry and viewing trade documents. They also use 
electronic communication software to communicate with customers and suppliers.  
Continuous Learning  
Welders may attend information and training seminars hosted by suppliers about new products. 
Employers also provide training specific to their company such as company policies, confined space 
entry, helicopter safety and H2S Alive. Welders must upgrade their knowledge and skills on an ongoing 
basis because of new innovations in consumables, and welding applications and processes. They may 
learn by researching technical information on the Internet, participating in formal training opportunities or 
informally  on the job.  
Welders are required by various codes to recertify or upgrade their qualifications within a specific period 
of time. Study and practice may be required in preparation for these tests.  
  

=== PAGE 15 ===
 
15  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Roles and Opportunities for Skilled Trades in a 
Sustainable Future  
 
Climate change affects all of us. Trades play a large role in implementing solutions and adjusting to 
changes in the world.  
 
Throughout this standard, there may be specific references to tasks, skills and knowledge that clearly 
show this trade’s role in a more sustainable future. Each trade has different roles to play and contributions 
to make in their own way.  
 
For example:  
 
• Construction tradespeople need to consider the materials they are using, building methods, and 
improvements to mechanical and electrical installations. There are important changes to codes and 
standards to help meet the climate change goals and commitments  set for 2030 and 2050. 
Retrofits and new construction of low-energy buildings provide enormous opportunities for workers 
in this sector. Concepts, such as energy efficiency and regarding buildings as systems are 
foundational.  
 
• Automotive and mechanical trades are seeing a shift towards the electrification of vehicles and 
equipment. As a result, new skills and knowledge will be required for tradespeople working in this 
sector. There are mandates for sales of new light-duty zero-emission vehicle s (ZEV) in Canada, 
with the goal of achieving 100% ZEV sales by 2035. Due to this mandate, the demand for these 
vehicles is growing quickly among consumers and fleets. With this escalating demand, the need for 
skilled workers to maintain and repair these v ehicles is also increasing.  
 
• In industrial and resource sectors, there is pressure to move towards increased electrification of 
industrial processes. Many industrial and commercial facilities are also being upgraded to improve 
energy efficiency in areas such as lighting systems, and n ew production processes and 
technologies. There are also opportunities in carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS), as 
well as the production and export of low -carbon hydrogen.  
  
• Trades in the service sector may also need to be aware of responsible sourcing, as well as efficient 
use of products and materials. New ways of working better are always a part of the job.  
 
There are fast-moving changes in guidelines, codes, regulations and specifications. Many are being 
implemented for the purpose of energy efficiency and climate change. Those that affect specific trades 
may be mentioned within the standard. Examples of thes e guidelines and legislation include:  
 
  
• The National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings (NECB).  
 
• The Canadian Net-Zero Emissions Accountability Act (CNZEAA).  
 
• programs that encourage sustainable building design and construction such as Leadership in 
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) and the Zero Carbon Building (ZCB) standards.  
 
• the Montreal Protocol for phasing out R22 refrigerants.  
 
• energy efficiency programs such as ENERGY STAR.  
 
• principles of the United Nations Declaration for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples pertaining to 
energy sector development.  

=== PAGE 16 ===
 
16  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 
 
Apprentices and tradespeople need to increase their climate literacy and reinforce their own 
understanding of energy issues and environmental practices. It is important for them to understand why 
these changes are happening and their effect on trades’ work. While individual tradespeople and 
apprentices may not be able to choose certain elements like; the architectural design of buildings, 
building material selection, regulatory requirements, use of electric vehicles and technologies, they must 
understand the impact of using these elements in t heir work. Impacts include using environmentally 
friendly products and following requirements related to the disposal and recycling of materials.  
 
In apprenticeship, as well as in ongoing professional development, employers and instructors should 
encourage learning about these concepts, why they are important, how they are implemented, and the 
overarching targets they are aiming to achieve.  
 
All in all, it’s about doing the work better and building a better world.  
  

=== PAGE 17 ===
 
17  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Industry Expected Performance  
All tasks must be performed according to the applicable jurisdictional codes and standards. All health and 
safety standards must be respected and observed. Work should be performed efficiently and to a high 
quality without material waste or environmental d amage. All requirements of employers, engineers, 
designers, manufacturers, clients and quality control policies must be met. At a journeyperson level of 
performance, all tasks must be done with minimal direction and supervision. As a journeyperson 
progresses in their career there is an expectation they continue to upgrade their skills and knowledge to 
maintain pace with industry and promote continuous learning in their trade through mentoring of 
apprentices.  
  

=== PAGE 18 ===
 
18  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Language Requirements 
It is expected that journeypersons are able to understand and communicate in either English or French, 
which are Canada’s official languages. English or French are the common languages of business as well 
as languages of instruction in apprenticeship progr ams. 
  

=== PAGE 19 ===
 
19  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Pie Chart  
of Red Seal Examination  
Weightings 
 
Major Work Activity A Performs common occupational skills   
Major Work Activity B Performs layout and fabrication of components for welding  
Major Work Activity C Performs cutting and gouging   
Major Work Activity D Performs welding processes   
This pie chart represents a breakdown of the interprovincial Red Seal examination. Percentages are 
based on the collective input from workers from the trade from across Canada. The Task Matrix on the 
next pages indicates the breakdown of tasks and sub -tasks within each Major Work Activity and the 
breakdown of questions assigned to the Tasks. The Interprovincial examination for this trade has 
125 questions.  
  
A
16%
B
22%
C
18%
D
44%

=== PAGE 20 ===
 
20  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Welder 
Task Matrix and Weightings  
 
A – Performs common occupational skills  16% 
 
Task A-1 
Maintains tools and equipment  
25% 
 A-1.01 Maintains hand, 
power, layout and measuring 
tools 
A-1.02 Maintains stationary 
machinery 
A-1.03 Maintains thermal 
cutting equipment 
  A-1.04 Maintains welding 
equipment 
  
Task A-2 
Uses access and material handling 
equipment 
15% 
 A-2.01 Uses access 
equipment 
A-2.02 Uses material 
handling equipment 
 
Task A-3 
Performs safety-related activities  
25% 
 A-3.01 Performs hazard 
assessments  
A-3.02 Maintains safe work 
environment 
A-3.03 Uses personal 
protective equipment (PPE) 
and safety equipment 
Task A-4 
Organizes work 
15% 
 A-4.01 Uses documentation 
and reference material  
A-4.02 Interprets drawings 
and welding symbols  
A-4.03 Plans job tasks  
  A-4.04 Organizes materials   

=== PAGE 21 ===
 
21  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task A-5 
Performs routine trade activities  
28% 
 A-5.01 Performs quality 
inspection 
A-5.02 Marks welds, 
materials and parts 
A-5.03 Controls temperature of 
weldments 
  A-5.04 Stores welding 
consumables and gas 
cylinders 
A-5.05 Selects welding 
processes and power source  
A-5.06 Performs equipment 
start-up and shut-down 
  A-5.07 Finishes final product   
Task A-6 
Uses communication and mentoring 
techniques 
2% 
 A-6.01 Uses communication 
techniques 
A-6.02 Uses mentoring 
techniques 
 
 
B – Performs layout and fabrication of components for welding  22% 
 
Task B-7 
Performs layout 
44% 
 B-7.01 Develops templates  B-7.02 Transfers dimensions 
from drawings to materials  
 
Task B-8 
Fabricates components 
56% 
 B-8.01 Prepares materials  B-8.02 Fits components for 
welding 
B-8.03 Assembles components  
 
C – Performs cutting and gouging  18% 
 
Task C-9 
Uses tools and equipment for non -
thermal cutting and grinding 
25% 
 C-9.01 Selects cutting and 
grinding tools 
C-9.02 Cuts using stationary 
power tools 
C-9.03 Cuts using shears and 
ironworkers 
  C-9.04 Cuts using hand tools  C-9.05 Cuts using portable 
power tools 
 

=== PAGE 22 ===
 
22  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task C-10 
Uses oxy-fuel gas cutting (OFC) process 
for cutting and gouging 
30% 
 C-10.01 Selects OFC gas and 
equipment 
C-10.02 Sets up OFC equipment  C-10.03 Sets operating 
parameters for OFC 
equipment 
  C-10.04 Performs cut and 
gouge using OFC equipment 
  
Task C-11 
Uses plasma arc cutting (PAC) process 
for cutting and gouging 
26% 
 C-11.01 Selects PAC 
equipment and consumables  
C-11.02 Sets up PAC equipment  C-11.03 Sets operating 
parameters for PAC 
equipment 
  C-11.04 Performs cut and 
gouge using PAC equipment 
  
Task C-12 
Uses air carbon arc cutting (CAC -A) 
process for cutting and gouging  
19% 
 C-12.01 Selects CAC -A 
equipment and consumables  
C-12.02 Sets up CAC -A 
equipment 
C-12.03 Sets operating 
parameters for CAC -A 
equipment 
  C-12.04 Performs cut and 
gouge using CAC-A equipment 
  
 
D – Performs welding processes 44% 
 
Task D-13 
Welds using shielded metal arc welding 
(SMAW) process  
33% 
 D-13.01 Selects SMAW 
equipment and consumables  
D-13.02 Sets up SMAW 
equipment 
D-13.03 Sets operating 
parameters for SMAW  
  D-13.04 Performs weld using 
SMAW equipment 
  

=== PAGE 23 ===
 
23  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task D-14 
Welds using flux cored arc welding 
(FCAW), metal cored arc welding 
(MCAW) and gas metal arc welding 
(GMAW) processes  
34% 
 D-14.01 Selects FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW gas, 
equipment and consumables  
D-14.02 Sets up FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW equipment 
D-14.03 Sets operating 
parameters for FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW 
  D-14.04 Performs weld using 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment 
  
Task D-15 
Welds using gas tungsten arc welding 
(GTAW) process 
24% 
 D-15.01 Selects GTAW gas, 
equipment and consumables 
D-15.02 Sets up GTAW 
equipment 
D-15.03 Sets operating 
parameters for GTAW 
  D-15.04 Performs weld using 
GTAW equipment 
  
Task D-16 
Welds using submerged arc welding 
(SAW) process  
9% 
 D-16.01 Selects SAW 
equipment and consumables  
D-16.02 Sets up SAW 
equipment 
D-16.03 Sets operating 
parameters for SAW  
  D-16.04 Performs weld using 
SAW equipment 
  
 
  

=== PAGE 24 ===
 
24  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Harmonization of Apprenticeship Training  
Provincial and territorial apprenticeship authorities are each responsible for their respective 
apprenticeship programs. In the spirit of continual improvement, and to facilitate mobility among 
apprentices in Canada, participating authorities have agreed to work towards harmonizing certain aspects 
of their programs where possible. After consulting with their stakeholders in the trade, they have reached 
consensus on the following elements. Note that implementation of these elements may vary from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, depending on their own circumstances. For more information on the 
implementation in any province and territory, please contact that jurisdiction’s apprenticeship authority. 
1. Trade name 
The official Red Seal name for this trade is Welder. 
2. Number of Levels of Apprenticeship 
The number of levels of technical training recommended for this trade is three (3). 
3. Total Training Hours  
The total hours of training, including both on -the-job and in -school training for this trade is 5400. 
4. Sequencing Topics and Related Sub-tasks 
The topic titles in the table below are placed in a column for each apprenticeship level for technical 
training. Each topic is accompanied by the sub-tasks and their reference number. The topics in the grey 
shaded cells represent those that are covered “in context” with other training in the subsequent years.  
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 Context Context 
 Tools and Equipment Tools and Equipment 
 Safety-Related Activities  Safety-Related Activities  
Tools and Equipment 
1.01 Maintains hand, power, layout and 
measuring tools 
1.02 Maintains stationary machinery 
1.03 Maintains thermal cutting 
equipment 
1.04 Maintains welding equipment  
Tools and Equipment 
1.04 Maintains welding equipment  
Tools and Equipment 
1.04 Maintains welding equipment  
Access and Material Handling 
Equipment 
2.01 Uses access equipment 
2.02 Uses material handling equipment  
  
Safety-Related Activities  
3.01 Performs hazard assessments  
3.02 Maintains safe work environment  
3.03 Uses personal protective 
equipment (PPE) and safety equipment  
  

=== PAGE 25 ===
 
25  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
Organizes Work 
4.01 Uses documentation and reference 
material 
4.02 Interprets drawings and welding 
symbols  
4.04 Organizes materials  
Organizes Work 
4.01 Uses documentation and reference 
material  
4.02 Interprets drawings and welding 
symbols  
4.03 Plans job task  
4.04 Organizes materials 
 
Routine Trade Activities  
5.01 Performs quality inspection  
5.02 Marks welds, materials and parts  
5.03 Controls temperature of weldments  
5.04 Stores welding consumables and 
gas cylinders 
5.05 Selects welding processes and 
power source 
5.06 Performs equipment start -up and 
shutdown 
5.07 Finishes final product 
Routine Trade Activities  
5.01 Performs quality inspection  
5.02 Marks welds, materials and parts  
5.03 Controls temperature of weldments  
5.04 Stores welding consumables and 
gas cylinders 
5.05 Selects welding processes and 
power source 
5.06 Performs equipment start -up and 
shutdown 
5.07 Finishes final product 
Routine Trade Activities  
5.01 Performs quality inspection  
5.02 Marks welds, materials and parts  
5.03 Controls temperature of weldments  
5.04 Stores welding consumables and 
gas cylinders 
5.05 Selects welding processes and 
power source 
5.06 Performs equipment start -up and 
shutdown 
5.07 Finishes final product 
Communication Techniques  
6.01 Uses communication techniques 
 Mentoring Techniques 
6.02 Uses mentoring techniques  
Performs Layout 
7.01 Develops templates  
7.02 Transfers dimensions from 
drawings to materials 
Performs Layout 
7.01 Develops templates  
7.02 Transfers dimensions from 
drawings to materials 
 
Fabricates Components 
8.01 Prepares materials  
8.02 Fits components or welding  
8.03 Assembles components  
Fabricates Components 
8.01 Prepares materials  
8.02 Fits components or welding  
8.03 Assembles components  
 
Tools and Equipment for Non-Thermal 
Cutting and Grinding 
9.01 Selects cutting and grinding tools  
9.02 Cuts using stationary power tools  
9.03 Cuts using shears and ironworkers  
9.04 Cuts using hand tools  
9.05 Cuts using portable power tools  
  
Oxy-fuel Gas Cutting (OFC) Process for 
Cutting and Gouging 
10.01 Selects OFC gas and equipment  
10.02 Sets up OFC equipment 
10.03 Sets operating parameters for 
OFC equipment 
10.04 Performs cut and gouge using 
OFC equipment 
  

=== PAGE 26 ===
 
26  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
Plasma Arc Cutting (PAC) Process for 
Cutting and Gouging 
11.01 Selects PAC equipment and 
consumables 
11.02 Sets up PAC equipment  
11.03 Sets operating parameters for 
PAC equipment 
11.04 Performs cut or gouge using PAC 
equipment 
  
Air Carbon Arc Cutting (CAC -A) Process 
for Cutting and Gouging 
12.01 Selects CAC -A equipment and 
consumables 
12.02 Sets up CAC -A equipment 
12.03 Sets operating parameters for 
CAC-A equipment 
12.04 Performs cut and gouge using 
CAC-A equipment 
  
Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
Process 
13.01 Selects SMAW equipment and 
consumables 
13.02 Sets up SMAW equipment  
13.03 Sets operating parameters for 
SMAW 
13.04 Performs weld using SMAW 
equipment 
Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
Process 
13.01 Selects SMAW equipment and 
consumables 
13.02 Sets up SMAW equipment 
13.03 Sets operating parameters for 
SMAW 
13.04 Performs weld using SMAW 
equipment 
Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) 
Process 
13.01 Selects SMAW equipment and 
consumables 
13.02 Sets up SMAW equipment  
13.03 Sets operating parameters for 
SMAW 
13.04 Performs weld using SMAW 
equipment 
Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), Metal 
Cored Arc Welding (MCAW) and Gas 
Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) Processes  
14.01 Selects FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
gas, equipment and consumables  
14.02 Sets up FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment 
14.03 Sets operating parameters for 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW  
14.04 Performs weld using FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), Metal 
Cored Arc Welding (MCAW) and Gas 
Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) Processes  
14.01 Selects FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
gas, equipment and consumables  
14.02 Sets up FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment 
14.03 Sets operating parameters for 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW  
14.04 Performs weld using FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW), Metal 
Cored Arc Welding (MCAW) and Gas 
Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) Processes  
14.01 Selects FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
gas, equipment and consumables  
14.02 Sets up FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment 
14.03 Sets operating parameters for 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW  
14.04 Performs weld using FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
 Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 
Process 
15.01 Selects GTAW gas, equipment and 
consumables 
15.02 Sets up GTAW equipment  
15.03 Sets operating parameters for 
GTAW 
15.04 Performs weld using GTAW 
equipment 
Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) 
Process 
15.01 Selects GTAW gas, equipment 
and consumables 
15.02 Sets up GTAW equipment  
15.03 Sets operating parameters for 
GTAW 
15.04 Performs weld using GTAW 
equipment 

=== PAGE 27 ===
 
27  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 
 Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) Process  
16.01 Selects SAW equipment and 
consumables 
16.02 Sets up SAW equipment  
16.03 Sets operating parameters for 
SAW 
16.04 Performs weld using SAW 
equipment 
Submerged Arc Welding (SAW) Process  
16.01 Selects SAW equipment and 
consumables 
16.02 Sets up SAW equipment  
16.03 Sets operating parameters for 
SAW 
16.04 Performs weld using SAW 
equipment 
  

=== PAGE 28 ===
 
28  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Major Work Activity A  
Performs Common Occupational Skills 
Task A-1 Maintains tools and equipment  
Task Descriptor 
Welders must maintain tools and equipment in order to keep them in safe working condition.  
A-1.01 Maintains hand, power, layout and measuring tools  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-1.01.01P select and use tools and equipment  tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-1.01.02P identify maintenance needs  maintenance needs are identified 
according to tool condition and 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-1.01.03P identify worn, damaged and defective 
tools and remove from service  
worn, damaged and defective tools are 
identified and removed from service  
A-1.01.04P sharpen striking tools and repair 
defective tooling heads  
striking tools are sharpened and 
defective tooling heads are repaired  
A-1.01.05P identify and sharpen twist drill bits  dull and damaged cutting edges on twist 
drill bits are identified and sharpened  
A-1.01.06P clean and lubricate tools after use  tools are cleaned and lubricated after use 
A-1.01.07P check accuracy and calibrate layout and 
measuring tools  
layout and measuring tools’ accuracy is 
checked and tools are calibrated  
A-1.01.08P store hand, power, layout and measuring 
tools  
hand, power, layout and measuring tools 
are stored according to manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
A-1.01.09P lubricate pneumatic tools and ensure air 
supply is dry and clean  
pneumatic tools are lubricated and air 
supply is dry and clean according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  

=== PAGE 29 ===
 
29  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-1.01.10P inspect safety guards, cords, switches, 
connectors and hoses  
safety guards, cords, switches, 
connectors and hoses are inspected for 
damage and defects  
A-1.01.11P check fluids in hydraulic tools  fluids in hydraulic tools are checked and 
topped up if required  
Range of Variables 
striking tools include: chipping hammers, chisels, punches  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-1.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of hand, power, 
layout and measuring tools, their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
identify hand tools, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify electric, pneumatic, and hydraulic 
power tools and attachments , and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify layout and measuring tools, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify  lubricants, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of hand, 
power, layout and measuring tools  
  identify and interpret information found in 
manufacturers’ specifications pertaining to 
maintenance of hand, power, layout and 
measuring tools  
A-1.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
maintain and store hand, power, layout 
and measuring tools  
identify tools and equipment used to 
maintain hand, power, layout and 
measuring tools, and describe their 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices when maintaining hand, power, 
layout and measuring tools  
  describe procedures to maintain hand, 
power, layout and measuring tools   
  describe procedures to store hand, power, 
layout and measuring tools  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle hand, power, layout and 
measuring tools  
  describe procedures to inspect hand, 
power, layout and measuring tools for 
damage and defects  

=== PAGE 30 ===
 
30  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
lubricants include: grease, gear oil, hydraulic oil, cutting fluids  
hazards include: particulate projection, cuts, chemical burns, electrocution  
A-1.02 Maintains stationary machinery  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-1.02.01P lock out/tag out (LOTO) stationary 
machinery  
stationary machinery is locked and 
tagged out prior to servicing  
A-1.02.02P identify maintenance needs  maintenance needs are identified 
according to tool condition and 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-1.02.03P clean stationary machinery and remove 
debris  
stationary machinery is cleaned, and 
debris is removed to keep work surface 
functional and safe  
A-1.02.04P lubricate stationary machinery stationary machinery is lubricated 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
A-1.02.05P inspect and top up coolant reservoir  coolant reservoir is inspected and topped 
up according to manufacturers’ 
specifications  
A-1.02.06P inspect and replace filters  filters in stationary machines are 
inspected and replaced according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-1.02.07P inspect and adjust belt tension  belt tension is inspected and adjusted 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
A-1.02.08P ensure guards, shielding and safety 
devices are in place  
guards, shielding and safety devices are 
in place according to manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
A-1.02.09P adjust tool rests on pedestal grinders and 
other rotating equipment  
tool rests on pedestal grinders and other 
rotating equipment are adjusted according 
to jurisdictional and Occupational Health 
and Safety (OH&S) regulations  
A-1.02.10P dress and true grinding stone on pedestal 
grinder 
grinding stone on pedestal grinder is 
dressed and trued according to wear 
pattern 

=== PAGE 31 ===
 
31  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-1.02.11P inspect cutting dies and blades for 
damage  
cutting dies and blades are inspected for 
damage to ensure safe operation and 
quality product  
A-1.02.12P inspect forming dies  forming dies are inspected for damage 
and debris  
A-1.02.13P identify worn, damaged and defective 
parts in stationary machinery, and 
remove them from service  
worn, damaged and defective parts in 
stationary machinery are identified and 
removed from service  
Range of Variables 
stationary machinery includes: pedestal grinders, shears, drill presses, band saws, brakes, ironworkers, 
rollers 
debris includes: steel shavings, off -cuts 
filters include: fume extractors, moisture, oil, air  
damage includes: chips, nicks, missing teeth  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-1.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of stationary 
machinery, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify types of stationary machinery, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of 
stationary machinery 
  identify types of filters in stationary 
machinery, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify cutting fluids, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify coolants, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify lubricants, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
A-1.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
maintain and store stationary machinery 
identify tools and equipment used to 
maintain stationary machinery, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to maintaining 
stationary machinery 
  describe procedures to LOTO stationary 
machinery 
  describe procedures to maintain 
stationary machinery 
  describe procedures to store stationary 
machinery  
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle stationary machinery 

=== PAGE 32 ===
 
32  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
stationary machinery includes: pedestal grinders, shears, drill presses, band saws, brakes, ironworkers, 
rollers 
filters include: fume extractors, moisture, oil, air  
lubricants include: grease, gear oil, cutting fluids  
hazards include: electrical, hand injury, cuts, eye injury  
A-1.03 Maintains thermal cutting equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-1.03.01P LOTO thermal cutting equipment  thermal cutting equipment is locked and 
tagged out according to regulations and 
manufacturers' specifications  
A-1.03.02P clean or blow out power source for 
thermal cutting equipment  
power source for thermal cutting 
equipment is cleaned or blown out  
A-1.03.03P identify and repair leaks  leaks are identified using methods and 
repaired 
A-1.03.04P repair or replace damaged gas and air 
lines to thermal cutting equipment  
damaged gas and air lines to thermal 
cutting equipment are repaired or 
replaced 
A-1.03.05P perform diagnosis of thermal cutting 
equipment problems 
diagnosis of thermal cutting equipment  
problems is performed according to test 
cut 
A-1.03.06P clean and store thermal cutting equipment thermal cutting equipment is cleaned and 
stored 
A-1.03.07P clean or replace consumables consumables are cleaned or replaced  
A-1.03.08P identify worn, damaged and defective 
thermal cutting equipment, and take 
corrective action 
worn, damaged and defective thermal 
cutting equipment is identified, and 
corrective action is taken 
Range of Variables 
methods include: creep test, soap test  
problems include: inconsistent operation, poor quality of cuts   
consumables include: tips, diffusers, electrodes, nozzles, gas cylinders   
corrective action includes: replacement, repair  

=== PAGE 33 ===
 
33  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-1.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of thermal cutting 
equipment, their components, 
consumables, characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify thermal cutting equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of thermal 
cutting equipment and their components 
  identify consumables used with thermal 
cutting equipment, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
A-1.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
maintain and store thermal cutting 
equipment and components 
identify tools and equipment used to 
maintain thermal cutting equipment , and 
describe their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to maintaining 
thermal cutting equipment  
  describe procedures to LOTO  thermal 
cutting equipment  
  describe procedures to maintain thermal 
cutting equipment  
  describe procedures to store thermal 
cutting equipment  
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle thermal cutting equipment  
Range of Variables 
components include: power sources, regulators, hoses, torches  
consumables include: tips, diffusers, electrodes, nozzles, gas cylinders   
hazards include: electrical shocks, cuts, hand injury, burns  
A-1.04 Maintains welding equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-1.04.01P select and use tools and equipment  tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-1.04.02P identify hazards and LOTO welding 
equipment  
hazards are identified and welding 
equipment is locked and tagged out  
A-1.04.03P clean or blow out power source for 
welding equipment  
power source for welding equipment is 
cleaned or blown out  

=== PAGE 34 ===
 
34  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-1.04.04P identify and repair or replace damaged 
shielding gas lines and regulators  
damaged shielding gas lines and 
regulators for welding equipment are 
identified and repaired or replaced  
A-1.04.05P perform diagnosis of welding equipment  diagnosis of welding equipment is 
performed to identify problems and 
ensure proper operation  
A-1.04.06P clean welding equipment  welding equipment is cleaned according 
to manufacturers’ specifications  
A-1.04.07P perform basic service on gas -driven or 
diesel-driven welding equipment  
basic service on gas -driven or diesel -
driven welding equipment is performed 
using procedures according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-1.04.08P identify worn, damaged and defective 
welding equipment and take corrective 
action 
worn, damaged and defective welding 
equipment is identified and corrective 
action taken 
Range of Variables 
hazards include: electrical shocks, burns, particulate projection  
problems include: inconsistent operation, poor weld quality  
procedures include: checking fluid levels and filters  
corrective action includes: replacement, repair or send out for calibration and service  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-1.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of welding 
equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify welding equipment, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of welding 
equipment 
  interpret information pertaining to welding 
equipment found in manufacturers’ 
specifications  
A-1.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
maintain and store welding equipment 
identify tools and equipment used to 
maintain welding equipment, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to maintaining 
welding equipment 
  describe procedures to LOTO welding 
equipment 
  describe procedures to maintain welding 
equipment 
  describe procedures to store welding 
equipment 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle welding equipment 

=== PAGE 35 ===
 
35  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
welding equipment includes: cables, electrode holder, guns, power sources, wire feed, gas lines  
hazards include: electrical shocks, burns, particulate projection  
Task A-2 Uses access and material handling equipment  
Task Descriptor 
Welders use access and material handling equipment in order to safely and effectively perform the duties 
of their trade.  
A-2.01 Uses access equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-2.01.01P select access equipment  access equipment is selected according 
to job requirements  
A-2.01.02P inspect access equipment for operation 
and compliance  
access equipment is inspected 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
for operation and compliance  
A-2.01.03P identify unsafe, wo  unsafe, worn, damaged and defective 
access equipment is identified, and 
corrective action is taken  
A-2.01.04P verify scaffolding is secure, level and 
stable  
scaffolding is secure, level and stable  
A-2.01.05P verify footing of ladders is secure, level 
and stable  
footing of ladders is secure, level and 
stable 
A-2.01.06P operate access equipment  access equipment is operated according 
to manufacturers’ specifications, and 
jurisdictional and OH&S regulations  
A-2.01.07P plan travel route of mobile access 
equipment 
travel route of mobile access equipment is 
planned and operational range is 
accounted for  
A-2.01.08P cordon off work area  work area is cordoned off  

=== PAGE 36 ===
 
36  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-2.01.09P perform routine maintenance on access 
equipment 
routine maintenance on access 
equipment is performed according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-2.01.10P secure and store access equipment in 
designated area  
access equipment is secured and stored 
in designated area according to company 
policies  
A-2.01.11P LOTO faulty access equipment  faulty access equipment is locked and 
tagged out according to company policies 
Range of Variables 
access equipment includes: scaffolding, ladders, aerial work platforms, fall arrest harnesses, anchor 
points  
routine maintenance includes: fluid top -ups, re-fuelling 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-2.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of access 
equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify access equipment, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of access 
equipment 
  identify safety shut -off buttons or 
switches, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  explain load capacity limits and centre of 
gravity of access equipment  
  describe considerations surrounding area 
and lift conditions and their effects on safe 
operation of access equipment 
A-2.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
use and operate access equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to access equipment 
  identify ladder safety practices and 
describe their applications  
  describe refuelling procedures  
  describe procedures to use and operate 
access equipment  
  describe procedures to cordon off work 
area 
  describe procedures to maintain access 
equipment 
  describe procedures to LOTO faulty 
access equipment 
  describe procedures to secure and store 
access equipment 

=== PAGE 37 ===
 
37  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-2.01.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
certification requirements to use and 
operate access equipment 
identify training and certification 
requirements to use and operate access 
equipment 
A-2.01.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to access 
equipment 
identify standards and jurisdictional 
regulations pertaining to access 
equipment 
Range of Variables 
access equipment includes: scaffolding, ladders, aerial work platforms, fall arrest harnesses, anchor 
points  
hazards include: falls, overhead, electrical, pinch/crush points  
ladder safety practices include: 3-point contact, ladder slope, load capacity label, access and egress  
A-2.02 Uses material handling equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-2.02.01P select material handling equipment  material handling equipment is selected 
according to task  
A-2.02.02P inspect material handling equipment  material handling equipment  is 
inspected and safe operation confirmed 
according to documented daily safety 
checks 
A-2.02.03P identify types of material  types of material are identified to 
determine weight 
A-2.02.04P calculate dimensions and weight  dimensions and weight are calculated 
according to material type, shape and size 
A-2.02.05P calculate sling angles  sling angles are calculated to ensure 
rigging is appropriate for load  
A-2.02.06P plan lift and path of travel, and confirm lay 
down area 
lift and path of travel is planned to 
minimize lift time and hazards, and lay 
down area is confirmed  
A-2.02.07P adjust material handling equipment and 
secure load 
material handling equipment is adjusted 
and load secured  
A-2.02.08P cordon off work area  work area is cordoned off according to 
site and safety requirements  
A-2.02.09P transfer and monitor load  load is transferred and monitored during 
transfer using spotter as required  
A-2.02.10P perform and interpret hand signals  hand signals are performed and 
interpreted 
A-2.02.11P place and use tag lines  tag lines are placed and used  

=== PAGE 38 ===
 
38  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-2.02.12P use dunnage and softeners  dunnage and softeners are used to 
protect rigging and load  
A-2.02.13P place load in pre -selected area  load is placed in pre -selected area 
according to orientation required  
A-2.02.14P locate and interpret load charts when 
using forklifts  
load charts are located and interpreted 
when using forklifts according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-2.02.15P store material handling equipment  material handling equipment  is stored 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
and company policies  
Range of Variables 
material handling equipment  includes: forklifts, rigging equipment, hoisting equipment, lifting 
equipment, dollies, chain falls, carts, conveyor rollers, shop cranes, overhead travelling cranes, mobile 
cranes 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-2.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of material 
handling equipment, their components, 
characteristics, applications and operation 
identify material handling equipment 
and their components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of material 
handling equipment and their 
components 
  interpret information pertaining to 
material handling equipment  found in 
manufacturers’ specifications  
  identify  rigging devices, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe load weights, centre of gravity, 
shape and dimensions and its effect on 
safe operation of material handling 
equipment 
  describe surrounding area and lift 
conditions and their effect on safe 
operation of material handling 
equipment 
A-2.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
use and operate material handling 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to material handling 
equipment 
  identify hand signals used to 
communicate during transferring and 
monitoring of load  
  describe procedures to complete log 
books for overhead cranes and forklifts  
  describe rigging methods 
  describe procedures to use and operate 
material handling equipment  

=== PAGE 39 ===
 
39  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe procedures to store material 
handling equipment 
  describe procedures to dispose of 
material handling equipment  
A-2.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
certification requirements to use and 
operate material handling equipment  
identify training and certification 
requirements to use and operate material 
handling equipment 
A-2.02.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to material 
handling equipment 
identify standards and jurisdictional 
regulations pertaining to material 
handling equipment 
Range of Variables 
material handling equipment  includes: forklifts, rigging equipment, hoisting equipment, lifting 
equipment, dollies, chain falls, carts, conveyor rollers, shop cranes, overhead travelling cranes, mobile 
cranes 
material handling components include: rigging devices, slings, ropes  
rigging devices include: beam clamps, tag lines, spreader bars, load softeners, plate clamps  
hazards include: falls, overhead, electrical, pinch/crush points, property and equipment damage  
rigging methods include: using chokers and basket hitches, vertical hitch  
Task A-3 Performs safety-related activities  
Task Descriptor 
Welders will encounter many hazards in their work environment. It is important that welders adhere to 
safety training, perform thorough hazard assessments, use personal protective equipment (PPE) and 
safety equipment correctly, and maintain a safe work environment.  
A-3.01 Performs hazard assessments 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-3.01.01P identify and report potential hazards potential hazards are identified by 
performing worksite inspection and 
reported according to company policies 
and OH&S requirements 
A-3.01.02P identify risks associated with changes in 
environmental conditions 
risks associated with changes in 
environmental conditions are identified  

=== PAGE 40 ===
 
40  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-3.01.03P identify risks associated with radiographic 
inspections  
risks associated with radiographic 
inspections are identified  
A-3.01.04P participate in safety meetings  safety meetings with personnel are 
attended to understand and communicate 
hazards 
Range of Variables 
hazards include: poor ventilation, chemical spills, toxic fumes, H 2S, electrical shocks, mechanical 
entanglement, potential explosions, radiological exposure 
environmental conditions include: weather, time of day  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-3.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of hazard 
assessments  
identify elements of hazard assessments, 
and describe their applications  
  describe risks associated with changes in 
environmental conditions  
  describe risks associated with 
radiographic inspections  
A-3.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
perform hazard assessments  
identify tools and equipment used to 
perform hazard assessments, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to performing hazard 
assessments  
  describe procedures to perform hazard 
assessments  
Range of Variables 
hazards include: poor ventilation, chemical spills, toxic fumes, H 2S, electrical shocks, mechanical 
entanglement, potential explosions, radiological exposure  
environmental conditions include: weather, time of day  
A-3.02 Maintains safe work environment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-3.02.01P select and use tools and equipment tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-3.02.02P participate in site orientation and safety 
training 
site orientation and safety training is 
completed  

=== PAGE 41 ===
 
41  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-3.02.03P handle and store hazardous materials  hazardous materials are handled and 
stored in designated areas  according to 
company policies, standards and 
Workplace Hazardous Materials 
Information System  (WHMIS) 
A-3.02.04P install temporary safety protection  temporary safety protection is installed 
according to site - or shop -specific 
requirements 
A-3.02.05P install individual locks on equipment lock-
out devices  
individual locks are installed on equipment 
lock-out devices to eliminate risk of 
energy entering workspace  
A-3.02.06P locate and clearly identify on -site safety 
locations  
on-site safety locations are located and 
clearly identified  
A-3.02.07P practice good housekeeping  good housekeeping is practiced  
A-3.02.08P plan safe route when moving material  safe route when moving material is 
planned 
A-3.02.09P follow emergency procedures emergency procedures are followed 
according to company policies, risk 
assessment and site conditions  
A-3.02.10P ensure stationary machines’ range of 
motion is unobstructed, guarded and 
well-marked 
stationary machines’ range of motion is 
unobstructed, guarded and well -marked 
A-3.02.11P ensure work site complies with 
requirements on safe work permits  
work site complies with requirements on 
safe work permits  
A-3.02.12P protect or remove combustible materials  combustible materials are protected or 
removed from work area  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: ventilation, monitors, spill kit  
hazardous materials include: acids, compressed gases, fuels  
safety protection includes: barriers, caution tape  
safety locations include: first aid stations, eye wash stations, muster points, fire extinguishers  
emergency procedures include: reporting hazardous spills, evacuation procedures, injured worker 
procedure/reporting, escape routes  
work permits include: hot work permits, confined space entry permits  

=== PAGE 42 ===
 
42  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-3.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of safe work 
environments 
identify safety locations, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe good housekeeping practices  
  describe workers’ rights and 
responsibilities  
  identify required ventilation for cutting and 
welding processes, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify emergency shut -down devices, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
A-3.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
maintain safe work environment  
identify tools and equipment used to 
maintain safe work environment, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  describe procedures to maintain safe 
work environment 
  identify hazardous materials, and 
describe procedures to handle and store 
them 
  describe procedures to install temporary 
safety protection 
  describe LOTO procedures 
  describe emergency procedures 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle materials  
A-3.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of site-specific 
training and certification requirements to 
maintain safe work environment  
identify site-specific training and 
certification requirements to maintain safe 
work environment 
A-3.02.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to maintaining 
safe work environments  
identify standards and jurisdictional 
regulations pertaining to maintaining safe 
work environments 
Range of Variables 
safety locations include: first aid stations, eye wash stations, muster points, fire extinguishers  
tools and equipment include: ventilation, monitors, spill kit  
hazardous materials include: acids, compressed gases, fuels  
safety protection includes: barriers, caution tape  
emergency procedures include: reporting hazardous spills, evacuation procedures, injured worker 
procedure/reporting, escape routes  
materials include: pickling compounds, oils, acids  
site-specific training includes: equipment operation, working in confined spaces, use of fall protection 
systems, H2S awareness 

=== PAGE 43 ===
 
43  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-3.03 Uses personal protective equipment (PPE) and safety equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-3.03.01P select PPE and safety equipment  PPE and safety equipment are selected 
according to task, hazard, company 
policies and OH&S regulations  
A-3.03.02P inspect PPE and safety equipment for 
conditions and remove from service  
PPE and safety equipment are inspected 
for conditions and removed from service 
A-3.03.03P adjust PPE  PPE is adjusted to ensure proper fit 
according to manufacturers’ specifications  
A-3.03.04P wear PPE and operate safety equipment  PPE is worn and safety equipment is 
operated according to manufacturers’ 
specifications and safe working 
procedures 
A-3.03.05P store and maintain PPE and safety 
equipment 
PPE and safety equipment are stored 
and maintained according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
Range of Variables 
PPE includes: hard hats, respirators, hearing protection, fall arrest harnesses, face shields, safety 
footwear, safety glasses, filter lenses, welding helmet, welding gloves, flame -resistant clothing  
safety equipment includes: fire extinguishers, safety blankets, grinder guards  
conditions include: worn, damaged, expired, defective  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-3.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of PPE and 
safety equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify PPE and safety equipment, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of safety 
equipment 
  identify safety locations, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
A-3.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
use PPE and safety equipment 
describe procedures to select and use 
PPE and safety equipment 
  describe inspection practices to identify 
PPE and safety equipment conditions 
  describe procedures to store and maintain 
PPE and safety equipment 
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle PPE and safety equipment 

=== PAGE 44 ===
 
44  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-3.03.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
certification requirements to use PPE and 
safety equipment 
identify training and certification 
requirements to use PPE and safety 
equipment 
A-3.03.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to using PPE and 
safety equipment 
identify standards and jurisdictional 
regulations pertaining to using PPE and 
safety equipment 
Range of Variables 
PPE includes: hard hats, respirators, hearing protection, fall arrest harnesses, face shields, safety 
footwear, safety glasses, filter lenses, welding helmet, welding gloves, flame -resistant clothing  
safety equipment includes: fire extinguishers, safety blankets, grinder guards  
safety locations include: first aid stations, eye wash stations, muster points, fire extinguishers  
conditions include: worn, damaged, expired, defective  
Task A-4 Organizes work 
Task Descriptor 
In order to organize their work, welders must be able to use documents and reference materials, interpret 
drawings and welding symbols, plan their project tasks, and obtain and organize required materials.  
A-4.01 Uses documentation and reference material  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-4.01.01P access electronic work-related 
documents, reference documentation 
and manuals 
electronic work-related documents, 
reference documentation and manuals 
are accessed using digital devices and 
software 
A-4.01.02P complete work-related documents work-related documents are completed 
according to company policies and 
procedures 
A-4.01.03P interpret reference documentation reference documentation is interpreted 
A-4.01.04P locate information in manuals  information in manuals is located  
A-4.01.05P convert between imperial and metric 
measurements 
measurements between imperial and 
metric are converted  

=== PAGE 45 ===
 
45  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
work-related documents include: time sheets, machinery checklists, progress report sheets, weld maps, 
dimensional checks, visual weld inspections, incident reports  
reference documentation includes: bill of materials, job plans, job specifications, Welding Procedures 
Specifications/Welding Procedures Data Sheets (WPS/WPDS), material traceability (mill reports), WHMIS 
materials 
manuals include: codes, specifications, equipment manuals, quality manuals, health and safety manuals  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-4.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of documentation 
and reference material, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of  work-related 
documents, reference documentation 
and manuals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify and interpret information found in 
reference documentation and manuals  
  describe procedures to complete work-
related documents 
  describe procedures to convert between 
imperial and metric measurements  
A-4.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
use and complete documentation and 
reference material  
describe procedures to use and complete 
documentation and reference material  
Range of Variables 
work-related documents include: time sheets, machinery checklists, progress report sheets, weld maps, 
dimensional checks, visual weld inspections, incident reports  
reference documentation includes: bill of materials, job plans, job specifications, Welding Procedures 
Specifications/Welding Procedures Data Sheets (WPS/WPDS), material traceability (mill reports), WHMIS 
materials 
manuals include: codes, specifications, equipment manuals, quality manuals, health and safety manuals  
A-4.02 Interprets drawings and welding symbols 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-4.02.01P access electronic drawings electronic drawings are accessed using 
digital devices and software  
A-4.02.02P review drawings and plans  drawings and plans are reviewed to 
retrieve required information for task  
A-4.02.03P interpret and apply welding symbols and 
notes 
welding symbols and notes are 
interpreted 

=== PAGE 46 ===
 
46  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-4.02.04P interpret types of lines  types of lines are interpreted  
A-4.02.05P convert between imperial and metric 
measurements 
measurements between imperial and 
metric are converted  
A-4.02.06P extract information from drawings information is extracted from drawings 
A-4.02.07P identify necessary components and 
materials for fabrication  
components and materials for fabrication 
are identified according to bill of materials 
on drawings 
Range of Variables 
drawings include: prints (blueprints), assembly drawings, detail drawings, shop and fabrication drawings, 
hand-drawn sketches, engineered drawings  
types of lines include: broken, hidden, centre, section  
information includes: dimensions, angles, non -destructive examination, tolerances, interferences, 
welding symbols  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-4.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of drawings and 
welding symbols, their characteristics and 
applications  
identify types of  drawings and welding 
symbols, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret information and welding symbols 
found on drawings  
  identify types of lines, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to convert between 
imperial and metric measurements  
  identify types of views on drawings  
  describe drafting principles 
A-4.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
interpret drawings and welding symbols  
describe procedures to interpret 
drawings and welding symbols  
Range of Variables 
drawings include: prints (blueprints), assembly drawings, detail drawings, shop and fabrication drawings, 
hand-drawn sketches, engineered drawings  
types of lines include: broken, hidden, centre, section  
types of views include: orthographic, isometric  
drafting principles include: drawings, grids, scales, revisions  

=== PAGE 47 ===
 
47  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-4.03 Plans job tasks 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-4.03.01P determine task requirements  task requirements to complete job are 
determined 
A-4.03.02P sequence order of operations  order of operations is sequenced 
according to job specifications and task  
A-4.03.03P schedule jobs and tasks  jobs and tasks are scheduled according to 
availability of resources and access to site 
A-4.03.04P anticipate safety requirements  safety requirements are anticipated 
according to hazard assessment  
A-4.03.05P coordinate tasks with co -workers and 
other trades 
tasks with co-workers and other trades 
are coordinated  
A-4.03.06P set up work area  work area is set up according to task  
A-4.03.07P generate cut lists and parts lists  cut lists and parts lists are generated 
according to drawings and bill of materials 
Range of Variables 
task requirements include: space, labour, materials, supplies, equipment 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-4.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of task 
requirements, their characteristics and 
applications  
identify task requirements, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify considerations to estimate time 
required to complete project tasks  
A-4.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
plan job tasks  
describe procedures to determine 
equipment, material and labour required 
to complete job  
  describe procedures to sequence order of 
operations  
  describe procedures to schedule jobs and 
tasks 
  describe procedures to anticipate safety 
requirements 

=== PAGE 48 ===
 
48  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe procedures to coordinate tasks 
with co-workers and other trades  
  describe procedures to set up work area  
  describe procedures to generate cut lists 
and parts lists  
Range of Variables 
task requirements include: space, labour, materials, supplies, equipment 
A-4.04 Organizes materials 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-4.04.01P gather materials materials are gathered according to cut 
list, parts list and job specifications  
A-4.04.02P verify bill of materials  bill of materials is verified by cross 
referencing with heat numbers, drawings 
and specifications  
A-4.04.03P document use of inventory use of inventory is documented according 
to company policies  
A-4.04.04P complete order sheet for out -of -stock 
materials 
order sheet for out-of -stock materials is 
completed according to company policies 
and procedures  
A-4.04.05P queue and orientate materials materials are queued and orientated 
according to sequence of assembly  
A-4.04.06P protect materials from damage  materials are protected from damage 
using coverings 
Range of Variables 
materials include: beams, plates, bar stock, pipe, tubing, flanges, elbows  
coverings include: sheathing, blankets, cardboard  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-4.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
organize materials 
describe procedures to gather materials  
  describe procedures to verify bill of 
materials and their origin  
  describe procedures to document use of 
inventory 

=== PAGE 49 ===
 
49  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe procedures to complete order 
sheet for out -of -stock materials 
  describe procedures to queue and 
orientate materials 
  identify coverings used to protect 
materials from damage  
Range of Variables 
materials include: beams, plates, bar stock, pipe, tubing, flanges, elbows  
coverings include: sheathing, blankets, cardboard  
Task A-5 Performs routine trade activities  
Task Descriptor 
Welders perform various activities during the cutting, gouging and welding processes. With the wealth of 
available equipment, welders must be able to select appropriate welding processes and power sources. 
They must follow manufacturers’ specifications, company policies and safety regulations in start-up and 
shut-down of equipment.  
Welders use methods of marking and identification for traceability. They apply heat and regulate cooling 
to control chemical and mechanical properties of the material. They properly store consumables to ensure 
weld quality.  
Quality assurance is important in this trade in order to produce quality products, save time and money, 
and ensure the required specifications are met. Welders use various methods of inspection to ensure 
quality. After the welding process, welders finish the final product to customer and code requirements.  
A-5.01 Performs quality inspection 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.01.01P select and use tools and equipment tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-5.01.02P identify material defects  material defects are identified by 
performing visual inspection  
A-5.01.03P confirm dimensions and weld 
specifications  
dimensions and weld specifications are 
confirmed by performing visual inspection 
and referring to drawings  
A-5.01.04P identify fabrication defects fabrication defects are identified by 
performing visual inspection  

=== PAGE 50 ===
 
50  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.01.05P continually check for dimensional 
distortion during welding process and 
recommend corrective measures  
dimensional distortion during welding is 
identified and corrective measures are 
applied  
A-5.01.06P select and use measuring devices  measuring devices are selected and 
used to verify weld dimensions according 
to job specifications and codes  
A-5.01.07P identify weld discontinuities and defects weld discontinuities and defects are 
identified by performing visual inspection 
A-5.01.08P identify surface imperfections  surface imperfections are identified by 
performing visual inspection  
A-5.01.09P determine acceptability of identified 
fabrication and material defects, and 
weld discontinuities and defects  
acceptability of identified fabrication and 
material defects, and weld 
discontinuities and defects is 
determined according to job specifications 
and codes  
A-5.01.10P maintain records and reports of material 
defects and weld discontinuities 
records and reports of material defects 
and weld discontinuities are maintained 
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: flashlights, magnifying lenses, measuring devices, inspection mirrors  
material defects include: surface irregularities, laminations, surface contamination  
fabrication defects include: improper fit -up, misalignment, distortion, incorrect dimensions and 
orientation 
measuring devices include: gauges (fillet weld, depth, high -lo, bridge cam), steel rulers  
weld discontinuities include: porosity, undercut, cold lap, excess or incomplete penetration  
surface imperfections include: welding spatter, gouges, stray arc strikes, sharp edges  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of quality 
inspections, their characteristics and 
applications  
identify visual acceptance criteria  
  identify material defects, and describe 
mitigation or repair methods  
  identify fabrication defects, and describe 
mitigation or repair methods  
  identify weld discontinuities and defects, 
and describe mitigation or repair methods 
  identify surface imperfections, and 
describe mitigation or repair methods  
  interpret information pertaining to quality 
inspection criteria found on drawings, job 
specifications and codes  

=== PAGE 51 ===
 
51  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
perform quality inspections  
identify tools and equipment used to 
perform quality inspections, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to performing quality 
inspections  
  describe procedures to perform quality 
inspections  
  describe non-destructive testing 
methods, their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe destructive testing methods, 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify measurements to be verified  
  describe an inspection test plan (ITP) and 
explain its purpose  
Range of Variables 
material defects include: surface irregularities, laminations, surface contamination  
fabrication defects include: improper fit -up, misalignment, distortion, incorrect dimensions and 
orientation 
weld discontinuities include: porosity, undercut, cold lap, excess or incomplete penetration  
surface imperfections include: welding spatter, gouges, stray arc strikes, sharp edges  
tools and equipment include: flashlights, magnifying lenses, measuring devices, inspection mirrors  
non-destructive testing methods include: radiography, ultrasonic, liquid penetrant, magnetic particle 
examination, hydro, phased array  
destructive testing methods include: bend and tensile strength, etching, impact, hardness  
measurements include: material, weld, on -going dimensional, final product  

=== PAGE 52 ===
 
52  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.02 Marks welds, materials and parts  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.02.01P determine type and size of material, and 
part numbers 
type and size of material and part 
numbers are determined by referencing 
drawings and job specifications  
A-5.02.02P transfer identification markings from 
stock material to cut parts  
identification markings are transferred 
from stock material to cut parts for 
traceability 
A-5.02.03P mark welder identification symbol on 
finished welds  
welder identification symbol is marked on 
finished welds according to job 
specifications  
Range of Variables 
identification markings include: heat numbers, grain direction, lot and job numbers, material grade  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of marking welds, 
materials and parts  
identify welds, types of materials and 
parts that are marked  
  identify identification markings, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify mill test reports (MTR), and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify methods companies use to 
organize materials 
  describe reasons for marking material 
and parts 
  describe personalized welder 
identification 

=== PAGE 53 ===
 
53  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
mark welds, materials and parts  
identify marking devices used to mark 
welds, materials and parts, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to marking welds, 
materials and parts  
  describe procedures to mark welds, 
materials and parts  
A-5.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to marking welds, 
materials and parts  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to marking welds, materials and 
parts 
Range of Variables 
types of materials include: ferrous and non -ferrous 
identification markings include: heat numbers, grain direction, lot and job numbers, material grade  
reasons for marking material and parts include: traceability, identification for fabrication and erection 
personalized welder identifications include: initials, numbers  
A-5.03 Controls temperature of weldments  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.03.01P select and use tools and equipment tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-5.03.02P determine heating requirements heating requirements are determined 
according to WPS/WPDS and job 
specifications  
A-5.03.03P select and use temperature measuring 
devices 
temperature measuring devices are 
selected and used to monitor temperature 
A-5.03.04P apply heat  heat is applied using tools and 
equipment and methods according to 
WPS/WPDS and job specifications  
A-5.03.05P follow procedures for different alloys  procedures for different alloys are 
followed according to WPS/WPDS and 
job specifications  

=== PAGE 54 ===
 
54  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.03.06P maintain pre-heat, interpass and post -
weld temperature 
pre-heat, interpass and post -weld 
temperature are maintained according to 
WPS/WPDS to prevent weld defects and 
maintain mechanical properties  
A-5.03.07P control cooling rate  cooling rate is controlled using methods 
according to WPS/WPDS and job 
specifications  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: insulation, heating tip (rose bud), heavy duty propane torch (tiger torch), 
induction heating coils, ovens  
heating requirements include: pre-heat, control of interpass temperature, post -heat applications  
temperature measuring devices include: temperature sticks, thermocouples, pyrometers  
methods include: insulation, heating coils, ovens  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of effects of 
temperature on weldments  
describe heating requirements, their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify hardness scales, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe metallurgy of materials  
A-5.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
control temperature of weldments  
identify tools and equipment used to 
control temperature of weldments, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  identify temperature measuring 
devices, and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to controlling 
temperature of weldments  
  describe procedures and methods to 
control temperature of weldments  
  describe procedures to apply heat, and 
heat effects on material  
  describe heat treatment methods, their 
characteristics and applications  

=== PAGE 55 ===
 
55  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe cooling processes 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle insulation  
A-5.03.03L demonstrate knowledge of WPS/WPDS 
pertaining to controlling temperature of 
weldments 
identify and interpret WPS/WPDS 
pertaining to controlling temperature of 
weldments 
Range of Variables 
heating requirements include: pre-heat, control of interpass temperature, post -heat applications  
hardness scales include: Rockwell, Brinell, Vickers  
tools and equipment include: insulation, heating tip (rose bud), heavy duty propane torch (tiger torch), 
induction heating coils, ovens  
temperature measuring devices include: temperature sticks, thermocouples, pyrometers  
hazards include: burns, electrical shocks  
methods include: insulation, heating coils, ovens  
heat effects include: expansion, contraction, distortion, mechanical properties  
heat treatment methods include: annealing, tempering, normalizing, hardening  
cooling processes include: quenching, controlled cooling  
A-5.04 Stores welding consumables and gas cylinders 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.04.01P identify welding consumables welding consumables are identified 
according to product labels and 
manufacturers’ specifications  
A-5.04.02P identify gas cylinders gas cylinders are identified according to 
product labels and manufacturers’ 
specifications  
A-5.04.03P identify storage requirements for welding 
consumables 
storage requirements for welding 
consumables are identified according to 
manufacturers’ specifications, codes and 
jurisdictional regulations  
A-5.04.04P identify storage requirements for gas 
cylinders 
storage requirements for gas cylinders 
are identified according to manufacturers’ 
specifications, codes and jurisdictional 
regulations 
A-5.04.05P place welding consumables in 
environmentally controlled area  
welding consumables are placed in 
environmentally controlled area according 
to safety data sheet ( SDS), 
manufacturers’ specifications, company 
procedures and codes  

=== PAGE 56 ===
 
56  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.04.06P place gas cylinders in designated area  gas cylinders are placed in designated 
area according to company procedures, 
codes  and jurisdictional regulations  
A-5.04.07P select and use equipment to keep 
welding consumables at desired 
temperature 
equipment is selected and used to keep 
welding consumables at desired 
temperature according to manufacturers’ 
specifications and codes  
A-5.04.08P identify and remove damaged products 
from service  
damaged products are identified and 
removed from service  
A-5.04.09P identify and remove damaged gas 
cylinders from service  
damaged gas cylinders are identified 
and removed from service according to 
company procedures  
Range of Variables 
welding consumables include: electrodes, welding wires, welding fluxes  
gas cylinders include: fuel, oxygen, inert, active  
storage requirements for gas cylinders include: oxygen kept separate from fuels, ventilation, kept in 
vertical position, secured with chains  
equipment includes: portable, stationary electrode and flux ovens  
damaged products include: damaged electrodes, torn bags of flux, unidentified welding consumables 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of welding 
consumables, their characteristics and 
applications  
identify welding consumables, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  interpret information pertaining to welding 
consumables found on WPS/WPDS and 
job specifications  
  identify environmentally controlled areas, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
A-5.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
store welding consumables 
identify equipment used to store welding 
consumables, and describe their 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to storing welding 
consumables 
  describe procedures and storage 
requirements for welding consumables 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle damaged products 
A-5.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of gas cylinders, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify gas cylinders, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret information pertaining to gas 
cylinders found in standards, 
jurisdictional regulations and safe work 
practices 

=== PAGE 57 ===
 
57  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
store gas cylinders 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to storing gas 
cylinders 
  describe procedures and storage 
requirements for gas cylinders 
  describe procedures to identify and 
remove damaged gas cylinders from 
service 
A-5.04.05L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to storage of gas 
cylinders 
identify standards and jurisdictional 
regulations pertaining to storage of gas 
cylinders 
Range of Variables 
welding consumables include: electrodes, welding wires, welding fluxes  
equipment includes: portable, stationary electrode and flux ovens  
hazards (welding consumables) include: burns, lifting, flux dust  
damaged products include: damaged electrodes, torn bags of flux, unidentified welding consumables 
gas cylinders include: fuel, oxygen, inert, active  
hazards (gas cylinders) include: explosions, displacement of oxygen (asphyxiation)  
storage requirements for gas cylinders include: oxygen kept separate from fuels, ventilation, kept in 
vertical position, secured with chains  
A-5.05 Selects welding processes and power source 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.05.01P determine limitations and advantages of 
different welding processes 
limitations and advantages of different 
welding processes are determined 
according to job requirements and 
environmental conditions  
A-5.05.02P select welding process welding process is selected according to 
WPS/WPDS, job requirements, and type, 
grade and thickness of material  

=== PAGE 58 ===
 
58  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.05.03P select power source  power source is selected according to 
welding process, and voltage and 
amperage requirements 
A-5.05.04P select stationary or portable power source stationary or portable power source is 
selected according to location of project 
and power availability  
Range of Variables 
welding processes include: shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), flux cored arc welding (FCAW), gas 
metal arc welding (GMAW), gas tungsten arc welding  (GTAW), metal cored arc welding  (MCAW), 
submerged arc welding  (SAW) 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.05.01L demonstrate knowledge of welding 
processes and power sources , their 
characteristics and applications  
identify welding processes, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret information pertaining to welding 
processes and power sources  found in 
WPS/WPDS, drawings, and 
manufacturers’ and job specifications  
  identify stationary or portable power 
sources, and describe their limitations and 
advantages 

=== PAGE 59 ===
 
59  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-5.05.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
select welding processes and power 
sources 
describe procedures and factors to 
consider when selecting welding 
processes and power sources  
A-5.05.03L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to welding 
processes and power sources  
identify emerging technologies related to 
welding processes and power sources, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
Range of Variables 
welding processes include: shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), flux cored arc welding  (FCAW), gas 
metal arc welding (GMAW), gas tungsten arc welding  (GTAW), metal cored arc welding  (MCAW), 
submerged arc welding  (SAW) 
A-5.06 Performs equipment start -up and shut -down 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.06.01P verify electrical, gas and air supplies are 
connected properly  
inspection of equipment verifies electrical, 
gas and air supplies are connected 
properly  
A-5.06.02P identify damaged equipment and remove 
from service  
damaged equipment is identified and 
removed from service  
A-5.06.03P start up and shut down equipment  equipment is started up and shut down 
according to manufacturers’ 
specifications, company policies and 
safety regulations  
 

=== PAGE 60 ===
 
60  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.06.01L demonstrate knowledge of equipment 
start-up and shut -down 
identify equipment start-up and shut-down 
requirements 
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to start-up and shut -
down of equipment  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down equipment  
Range of Variables 
hazards include: electrical shocks, burns, exhaust fumes  
A-5.07 Finishes final product 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-5.07.01P select and use tools and equipment tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
A-5.07.02P identify finishes  finishes are identified according to 
drawings and job specifications  
A-5.07.03P identify weld profile  weld profile is identified according to 
drawings and job specifications  
A-5.07.04P identify weld discontinuities and defects, 
and surface imperfections 
weld discontinuities and defects, and 
surface imperfections are identified by 
performing visual inspection  
A-5.07.05P repair and finish weld discontinuities 
and defects, and surface imperfections  
weld discontinuities and defects, and 
surface imperfections are repaired using 
industry approved repair procedures  
A-5.07.06P prepare weldments and other pieces  weldments and other pieces are prepared 
according to WPS/WPDS, job 
specifications and codes  
A-5.07.07P chemically clean weldments  weldments are chemically cleaned to 
remove undesirable materials 
A-5.07.08P prepare weldments for galvanizing  weldments are prepared for galvanizing 
by providing air bleeds and drain holes  
A-5.07.09P label parts for traceability  labels are attached to parts to ensure 
traceability 
A-5.07.10P sort assemblies for specific finishes assemblies are sorted for specific 
finishes 

=== PAGE 61 ===
 
61  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: grinders, wire wheels, buffers  
weld discontinuities include: porosity, undercut, cold lap, excess or incomplete penetration  
surface imperfections include: welding spatter, gouges, stray arc strikes, sharp edges, plate clamp 
gouges, miscellaneous defects  
undesirable materials include: oils, oxides  
specific finishes include: coatings, pickling, machining, blasting  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-5.07.01L demonstrate knowledge of finishes  identify types of finishes, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  interpret information pertaining to finishes 
found on drawings and job specifications  
A-5.07.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
finish final product  
identify tools and equipment used to 
finish final product, and describe their 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to finishing final 
products  
  identify weld discontinuities and defects, 
and surface imperfections, and describe 
their characteristics and procedures to 
repair them 
  identify undesirable materials and 
procedures to remove them  
  describe procedures to finish final 
products  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: grinders, wire wheels, buffers  
hazards include: particulate projection/sparks, cuts, dust/particulate inhalation, toxic chemicals  
weld discontinuities include: porosity, undercut, cold lap, excess or incomplete penetration  
surface imperfections include: welding spatter, gouges, stray arc strikes, sharp edges, plate clamp 
gouges, miscellaneous defects  
undesirable materials include: oils, oxides  

=== PAGE 62 ===
 
62  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task A-6 Uses communication and mentoring techniques  
Task Descriptor 
Learning in the trades is done primarily in the workplace with tradespeople passing on their skills and 
knowledge to apprentices, as well as sharing knowledge among themselves. Apprenticeship is, and 
always has been about mentoring – learning workplace skills and passing them on. Because of the 
importance of this to the trade, this task covers the activities related to communication in the workplace 
and mentoring skills.  
A-6.01 Uses communication techniques  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-6.01.01P demonstrate communication practices 
with individuals or in a group  
instructions and messages are interpreted 
by all parties involved in communication  
A-6.01.02P listen using active listening practices  active listening practices are utilized  
A-6.01.03P speak clearly using correct industry 
terminology to ensure understanding  
understanding of message is confirmed 
by both parties  
A-6.01.04P receive and respond to instructions  response to instructions indicates 
understanding  
A-6.01.05P receive and respond to feedback on work 
completed or performed  
response to feedback indicates 
understanding and corrective measures 
are taken 
A-6.01.06P explain and provide feedback  explanation and feedback is provided and 
task is carried out as directed  
A-6.01.07P use questions to improve communication questions enhance understanding, 
on-the-job training and goal setting  
A-6.01.08P participate in safety and information 
meetings 
meetings are attended, information is 
relayed to workforce, and is applied  
A-6.01.09P send and receive electronic messages electronic messages are sent and 
received using professionalism, plain 
language and clear expressions according 
to company policies  
Range of Variables 
active listening includes: hearing, interpreting, reflecting, responding, paraphrasing  
electronic messages include: emails, text messages  

=== PAGE 63 ===
 
63  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-6.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of trade 
terminology  
define terminology used in trade  
A-6.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of effective 
communication practices  
describe importance of using effective 
verbal and non-verbal communication with 
people in the workplace  
  identify sources of information to 
effectively communicate  
  identify communication and learning 
styles  
  describe effective listening and speaking 
skills 
  describe how to receive and give 
instructions effectively  
  identify personal responsibilities and 
attitudes that contribute to on -the-job 
success  
  identify value of equity, diversity and 
inclusion in workplace  
  identify communication that constitutes 
bullying, harassment and discrimination 
  identify communication styles appropriate 
to different systems and applications of 
electronic messages  
Range of Variables 
people in the workplace include: other tradespeople, colleagues, apprentices, supervisors, clients, 
jurisdictional representatives, manufacturers  
sources of information include: regulations, codes, occupational health and safety requirements, 
jurisdictional requirements, drawings, specifications, company and client documentation  
learning styles include: visual, auditory, reading, writing, kinesthetic  
personal responsibilities and attitudes include: asking questions, working safely, accepting 
constructive feedback, time management and punctuality, respect for authority, good stewardship of 
materials, tools and property, efficient work practice  
harassment: as defined by the Canadian and jurisdictional Human Rights Commissions  
discrimination: as defined by the Canadian Human Rights Act and jurisdictional human rights laws  
electronic messages include: emails, text messages  

=== PAGE 64 ===
 
64  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
A-6.02 Uses mentoring techniques 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
A-6.02.01P identify and communicate learning 
objective and point of lesson  
apprentice or learner can explain 
objective and point of lesson  
A-6.02.02P link lesson to other lessons and project  lesson order and unplanned learning 
opportunities are defined  
A-6.02.03P demonstrate performance of a skill to an 
apprentice or learner 
steps required to demonstrate a skill 
are performed  
A-6.02.04P set up conditions required for apprentice 
or learner to practice a skill  
practice conditions are set up so that 
skill can be practiced safely by apprentice 
or learner 
A-6.02.05P assess apprentice or learner’s ability to 
perform tasks with increasing 
independence 
performance of apprentice or learner 
improves with practice to a point where 
skill can be done with little supervision  
A-6.02.06P give supportive and corrective feedback  apprentice or learner adopts best practice 
after having been given supportive or 
corrective feedback  
A-6.02.07P support apprentices or learners in 
pursuing technical training opportunities  
technical training is completed within 
timeframe prescribed by apprenticeship 
authority 
A-6.02.08P support anti -harassment and anti-
discrimination practices in workplace  
workplace is harassment and 
discrimination-free 
A-6.02.09P assess apprentice or learner suitability to 
trade during probationary period  
apprentice or learner is given constructive 
feedback that helps them identify their 
own strengths and weaknesses and 
suitability for the trade  
Range of Variables 
steps required to demonstrate a skill include: understanding who, what, where, when, why, and how; 
explaining; showing; giving encouragement ; following up to ensure skill is performed correctly  
practice conditions means: guided, limited independence, full independence  
harassment: as defined by the Canadian and jurisdictional Human Rights Commissions  
discrimination: as defined by the Canadian Human Rights Act and jurisdictional human rights laws  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
A-6.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of strategies for 
learning skills in workplace  
describe importance of individual 
experience 
  describe shared responsibilities for 
workplace learning 

=== PAGE 65 ===
 
65  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  determine one’s own learning preferences 
and explain how these relate to learning 
new skills 
  describe importance of different types of 
skills in workplace  
  describe importance of skills for success 
(essential skills) in workplace 
  identify different learning styles  
  identify different learning needs and 
strategies to meet them  
  identify strategies to assist in learning a 
skill 
A-6.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of strategies for 
teaching workplace skills  
identify different roles played by 
workplace mentor  
  describe teaching skills  
  explain importance of identifying point of 
lesson 
  identify how to select a good time to 
present lesson  
  explain importance of linking lessons  
  identify context for learning skills  
  describe considerations in setting up 
opportunities for skill practice  
  explain importance of providing feedback 
  identify techniques for giving effective 
feedback  
  describe a skills assessment  
  identify methods of assessing progress  
  explain how to adjust lesson to different 
situations  
Range of Variables 
skills for success (essential skills) are: adaptability, collaboration, communication, creativity and 
innovation, digital, numeracy, problem solving, reading, writing  
learning styles include: visual, auditory, reading, writing, kinesthetic  
learning needs include: learning disabilities, learning preferences, language proficiency  
strategies to assist in learning a skill include: understanding the basic principles of instruction, 
developing coaching skills, being mature and patient, providing feedback  
teaching skills include: identifying point of lesson, linking lesson, demonstrating skill, providing practice, 
giving feedback, assessing skills and progress  
  

=== PAGE 66 ===
 
66  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Major Work Activity B  
Performs layout and fabrication of 
components for welding 
Task B-7 Performs layout 
Task Descriptor 
Welders lay out materials before any fabrication procedure such as cutting, drilling, bending and welding. 
It is important that the layout be done properly to prevent waste and ensure proper fit and accuracy.  
B-7.01 Develops templates 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
B-7.01.01P select and use measuring and layout 
tools and equipment 
measuring and layout tools and 
equipment are selected and used 
according to task  
B-7.01.02P determine template materials and  
properties 
template materials and properties are 
determined according to specific 
application  
B-7.01.03P determine starting point  starting point is determined according to 
working point and axis  
B-7.01.04P extend or create lines from working points lines are extended or created from 
working points  
B-7.01.05P transfer dimensions from drawing to 
template 
dimensions are transferred from drawing 
to template  
B-7.01.06P complete profile  profile is completed from transferred 
dimensions  
B-7.01.07P shape template template is shaped using measuring and 
layout tools and equipment according to 
template materials 
B-7.01.08P mark template with information  template is marked with information  

=== PAGE 67 ===
 
67  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
measuring and layout tools and equipment include: combination squares, measuring tapes, plumb 
bobs, marking devices, compasses, trammel points, straightedges, string lines, dividers, levels, transfer 
punches, center punches, radius markers  
properties include: durability, fire resistance  
template materials include: wood, cardboard, metal, paper  
information includes: part numbers, layout information, material required 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
B-7.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of templates, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify types of templates, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe principles of templates  
  interpret information pertaining to 
templates found on drawings and 
specifications  
  identify template materials, and describe 
their properties and applications  
  identify imperial and metric systems of 
measurements and describe conversion 
factors  
  identify reference points and dimensions 
that need to be transferred 
  identify starting point, working points and 
axis, and describe their characteristics 
and applications  
  identify information marked on 
templates, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
B-7.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
develop templates  
identify measuring and layout tools and 
equipment used to develop templates, 
and describe their procedures for use  
  identify digital measuring tools used to 
develop templates  and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to developing 
templates 
  describe procedures to develop template 
  describe procedures to identify starting 
point, working points and axis  
  describe procedures to transfer 
dimensions from drawing to template  
  describe procedures to complete profile  

=== PAGE 68 ===
 
68  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe procedures to cut template 
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle templates  
  describe template materials 
B-7.01.03L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to developing 
templates 
identify emerging technologies related to 
developing templates, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
Range of Variables 
types of templates include: hole-punching templates, wrap arounds, cutting templates, arc templates 
(sweeps) 
properties include: durability, fire resistance  
information includes: part numbers, layout information, material required 
measuring and layout tools and equipment include: combination squares, measuring tapes, plumb 
bobs, marking devices, compasses, trammel points, straightedges, string lines, dividers, levels, transfer 
punches, center punches, radius markers  
digital measuring tools include: calipers, levels, measuring devices  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, debris  
template materials include: wood, cardboard, metal, paper  
B-7.02 Transfers dimensions from drawings to materials 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
B-7.02.01P select and use measuring and layout 
tools and equipment 
measuring and layout tools and 
equipment are selected and used 
according to task  
B-7.02.02P interpret information from drawings and 
welding symbols  
information is interpreted from drawings 
and welding symbols and is transferred to 
materials 
B-7.02.03P determine work points work points are determined to identify 
location and orientation of components 
according to drawings  
B-7.02.04P perform mathematical calculations mathematical calculations are 
performed according to task  
B-7.02.05P determine total material required  total material required is determined 
according to factors to maximize 
efficiency and quality  
B-7.02.06P verify layout for accuracy  layout is verified for accuracy according to 
drawings, specifications, and company 
policies and procedures  

=== PAGE 69 ===
 
69  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
measuring and layout tools and equipment include: combination squares, measuring tapes, plumb 
bobs, marking devices, compasses, trammel points, straightedges, string lines, dividers, levels, transfer 
punches, center punches  
work points include: centre lines, hole locations, end preparation lines, base point, axis 
mathematical calculations include: conversions, ratios, proportions, fractions, geometry, decimals  
factors include: size, material usage, seam location, bend allowances, kerf, job requirements  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
B-7.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of transferring 
dimensions from drawings to template 
material 
identify template materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  interpret information and symbols 
pertaining to dimensions found on 
drawings and specifications  
  identify work points and axis, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
B-7.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
transfer dimensions from drawings to 
materials 
identify measuring and layout tools and 
equipment used to transfer dimensions 
from drawings to materials, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify digital measuring tools used to 
transfer dimensions from drawings to 
materials and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to transferring 
dimensions from drawings to materials  
  describe procedures to transfer 
dimensions from drawings to materials  
  describe procedures to determine work 
points 
  perform mathematical calculations used 
to transfer dimensions from drawings to 
materials 
  describe procedures to verify layout  

=== PAGE 70 ===
 
70  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
template materials include: wood, cardboard, metal  
measuring and layout tools and equipment include: combination squares, measuring tapes, plumb 
bobs, marking devices, compasses, trammel points, straightedges, string lines, dividers, levels, transfer 
punches, center punches  
digital measuring tools include: calipers, levels, measuring devices  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, debris, cuts 
work points include: centre lines, hole locations, end preparation lines, base point, axis 
mathematical calculations include: conversions, ratios, proportions, fractions, geometry, decimals  
Task B-8 Fabricates components 
Task Descriptor 
Fabrication is the process done prior to welding. It involves preparation of materials and fitting and 
assembling them. These processes are often done in conjunction with other tradespersons. It is critical 
that pieces be fabricated within the tolerances of specifications.  
B-8.01 Prepares materials 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
B-8.01.01P select and use tools and equipment  tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task  
B-8.01.02P verify components’ dimensions, conditions 
and grade 
components’ material type, grade, 
thickness and size are verified to ensure 
compliance with job specifications  
B-8.01.03P verify all preparation processes have 
been completed  
all preparation processes have been 
completed according to drawings and 
specifications  
B-8.01.04P clean weld areas weld areas are cleaned using abrasive 
techniques according to WPS/WPDS, job 
specifications and material requirements  
B-8.01.05P prepare edge for assembly  edge is prepared for assembly by 
squaring or bevelling according to job 
specifications, tolerances and information 
in welding symbols  
Range of Variables 
preparation processes include: drilling, punching, forming, grinding, thermal processes  
abrasive techniques include: grinding, using a file, chemicals  

=== PAGE 71 ===
 
71  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
B-8.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of welding 
components and materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify welding components and 
materials, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret information pertaining to welding 
components and materials found on 
drawings and specifications  
  describe preparation process 
  describe cleaning process using abrasive 
techniques 
  describe characteristics and applications 
of dimensional tolerances  
  describe imperial and metric systems of 
measurements and conversions  
B-8.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
prepare welding components and 
materials 
identify tools and equipment used to 
prepare welding components and 
materials, and describe their procedures 
for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to preparing welding 
components and materials 
  describe procedures to perform material 
preparation processes 
  describe procedures to clean weld areas 
  describe procedures to prepare edge for 
assembly  
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle welding components and 
materials 
Range of Variables 
preparation processes include: drilling, punching, forming, grinding, thermal processes  
abrasive techniques include: grinding, using a file, chemicals  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, debris 

=== PAGE 72 ===
 
72  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
B-8.02 Fits components for welding 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
B-8.02.01P select and use tools and equipment for 
tacking 
tools and equipment for tacking  are 
selected and used according to task  
B-8.02.02P join components mechanically  components are joined mechanically 
according to drawings and specifications 
using clamps and fixtures  
B-8.02.03P pre-heat base metals for tacking  base metals are pre-heated for tacking 
according to job specifications  
B-8.02.04P select tacking materials and tacking 
methods 
tacking materials and tacking methods 
are selected according to job 
specifications  
B-8.02.05P join components by tacking  components are joined by tacking 
according to job specifications  
B-8.02.06P identify and repair common 
discontinuities in a tack 
discontinuities in tack are identified and 
repaired according to industry approved 
repair procedures  
B-8.02.07P identify and repair common defects in a 
tack 
defects in tack are identified and repaired 
according to industry approved repair 
procedures 
B-8.02.08P identify methods to control expansion 
and contraction 
methods to control expansion and 
contraction are identified  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: hi-lo gauges, wedges, clamps, sawhorses, jigs, fixtures  
tacking methods include: bridge, penetrating, plug 
discontinuities include: porosity, slag inclusions  
defects include: lack of penetration, incomplete penetration, lack of fusion, incomplete fusion, undercut, 
spatter, slag inclusions, cracks, porosity, overlap  
methods to control expansion and contraction include: using strongbacks, gussets and tacking 
sequence, heat sinks  

=== PAGE 73 ===
 
73  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
B-8.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of components 
for welding, their characteristics, 
applications  
identify components for welding, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  interpret information pertaining to 
components for welding found on 
drawings and specifications  
  identify types of base metals, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify types and sizes of tacks, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe pre -heating requirements for 
tacking 
  describe sequence of tacks  
  describe welding processes to be used 
after tacking  
  describe impact of tack welding on base 
metals 
  describe inspection requirements for 
components  
B-8.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
fit components for welding  
identify tools and equipment used to fit 
components for welding, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to fitting components 
for welding  
  describe procedures to join components 
for welding  
  describe tacking methods 
  describe methods to control expansion 
and contraction 
  describe procedures to repair common 
defects in a tack 
  describe procedures to dispose of and 
recycle components for welding  
B-8.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to tacking 
components  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to tacking components  

=== PAGE 74 ===
 
74  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: hi-lo gauges, wedges, clamps, sawhorses, jigs, fixtures  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, debris, rotating equipment 
tacking methods include: bridge, penetrating, plug 
methods to control expansion and contraction include: using strongbacks, gussets and tacking 
sequence, heat sinks  
defects include: lack of penetration, incomplete penetration, lack of fusion, incomplete fusion, undercut, 
spatter, slag inclusions, cracks, porosity, overlap  
B-8.03 Assembles components 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
B-8.03.01P select and use tools and equipment tools and equipment are selected and 
used according to task 
B-8.03.02P determine sequence for assembly  sequence for assembly is determined 
according to drawings  
B-8.03.03P set gaps and alignments  gaps and alignments are set within 
tolerance levels according to 
specifications  
B-8.03.04P fit, place and adjust components  components are fit, placed and adjusted, 
ensuring they are level, plumb and 
orientated according to drawings  
B-8.03.05P fasten components  components are fastened together using 
fastening devices according to plans and 
specifications  
B-8.03.06P verify assembly throughout all stages  assembly is verified throughout all stages 
according to drawings and specifications 
Range of Variables 
tools and equipment include: hi-lo gauges, wedges, clamps, sawhorses, jigs and fixtures, cranes, slings, 
alignment tools  
fastening devices include: bolts, clips  

=== PAGE 75 ===
 
75  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
B-8.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of components , 
their characteristics, applications and 
operation 
identify components , and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify fastening devices, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  interpret information pertaining to 
components  found on drawings and 
specifications  
  identify assembly constraints 
  identify isometric and orthographic views 
and sketching techniques for assembly 
plan 
  identify material allowances for bending, 
braking and rolling  
B-8.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
assemble components  
identify tools and equipment used to 
assemble components, and describe their 
procedures for use  
  identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to assembling 
components  
  describe procedures to assemble 
components  
B-8.03.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to assembling 
components for pressure vessels  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to assembling components for 
pressure vessels  
Range of Variables 
fastening devices include: bolts, clips  
assembly constraints include: building size, equipment limitations  
tools and equipment include: hi-lo gauges, wedges, clamps, sawhorses, jigs and fixtures, cranes, slings, 
alignment tools  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, debris 
  

=== PAGE 76 ===
 
76  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Major Work Activity C  
Performs cutting and gouging  
Task C-9 Uses tools and equipment for non-thermal cutting and 
grinding  
Task Descriptor 
Welders must match tools and equipment with the material being cut and ground. They must be aware of 
tool applications and limitations. They must select the proper blade or disc for the task.  
C-9.01 Selects cutting and grinding tools 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-9.01.01P identify type of material being cut or 
ground 
type of material being cut or ground is 
identified according to job specifications  
C-9.01.02P select cutting and grinding tools and 
equipment 
cutting and grinding tools and 
equipment are selected according to 
application, grade and thickness of 
material, type of cut and tool limitation  
C-9.01.03P select cutting and grinding consumables cutting and grinding consumables are 
selected according to material type, 
grade, thickness, size and finish required, 
and manufacturers’ specifications  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, high alloy  
cutting and grinding tools and equipment  include: band saw, cold cut saws, nibblers, power 
hacksaws, ironworkers, shears, hand tools, power tools  
consumables include: discs, blades, wire wheels  

=== PAGE 77 ===
 
77  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-9.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of cutting and 
grinding tools and equipment, their 
characteristics, applications and 
limitations  
identify cutting and grinding tools and 
equipment, and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
limitations  
  identify air pressure ratings of pneumatic 
grinders, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of blades for cutting ferrous 
metals and non -ferrous metals, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify types of discs, and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
limitations  
  identify consumables, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
C-9.01.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
use cutting and grinding tools and 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting and 
grinding tools and equipment used to 
cut materials 
  describe procedures to use cutting and 
grinding tools and equipment 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle cut materials  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, high alloy  
cutting and grinding tools and equipment  include: band saw, cold cut saws, nibblers, power 
hacksaws, ironworkers, shears, hand tools, power tools  
types of discs include: composite, carbide , abrasive 
consumables include: discs, blades, wire wheels  
hazards include: cuts, flying debris, noise, fire  

=== PAGE 78 ===
 
78  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-9.02 Cuts using stationary power tools 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-9.02.01P select feed and speed rates  feed and speed rates are selected 
according to material type, grade, 
thickness, size  and manufacturers’ 
specifications  
C-9.02.02P measure material to be cut  material to be cut is measured according 
to drawings and specifications  
C-9.02.03P secure material material is secured according to 
manufacturers’ specifications to prevent 
damage to blade and material, and injury 
C-9.02.04P perform cut  cut is performed according to job 
specifications  
C-9.02.05P verify cut parameters and cut quality  cut parameters and cut quality are verified 
for accuracy  
 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-9.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of stationary 
power tools, their characteristics, 
applications and limitations  
identify stationary power tools, and 
describe their characteristics, applications 
and procedures for use  
  identify types of blades for cutting ferrous 
metals and non -ferrous metals, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify blade clearances, speed, 
direction, composition and pitch  
  identify types of cuts, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
C-9.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut materials using stationary power 
tools 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting materials 
using stationary power tools 
  describe procedures to cut materials 
using stationary power tools 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle cut materials  

=== PAGE 79 ===
 
79  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, high alloy  
stationary power tools include: band saws, cold cut saws, power hacksaws, pedestal grinder, drill press 
types of cuts include: straight, bevel, compound  
hazards include: cuts, noise, rotating equipment  
C-9.03 Cuts using shears and ironworkers 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-9.03.01P select shear and ironworker settings  shear and ironworker settings are 
selected according to material type, 
grade, thickness, size and manufacturers’ 
specifications to avoid blade and 
equipment damage  
C-9.03.02P measure material to be cut  material to be cut is measured according 
to drawings and specifications  
C-9.03.03P secure material material is secured according to 
manufacturers’ specifications to prevent 
damage to blade and material, and injury 
C-9.03.04P perform cut  cut is performed according to job 
specifications  
C-9.03.05P verify cut parameters and cut quality  cut parameters and cut quality are verified 
for accuracy  
 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-9.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of shears and 
ironworkers, their characteristics, 
applications and limitations 
identify shears and ironworkers, and 
describe their characteristics, 
applications and limitations 
  identify digital shears, and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
procedures for use  

=== PAGE 80 ===
 
80  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-9.03.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut materials using shears and 
ironworkers 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting materials 
using shears and ironworkers  
  describe procedures to cut materials 
using shears and ironworkers  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle cut materials  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel  
applications include: cutting plates , structural shapes, punching holes  
limitations include: type, grade, thickness and size of material being cut  
hazards include: pinching, cuts, shattered tooling  
C-9.04 Cuts using hand tools 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-9.04.01P measure material to be cut  material to be cut is measured according 
to drawings and specifications  
C-9.04.02P secure material material is secured using manufactured 
safety devices to prevent damage to 
hand tools  and material, and injury 
C-9.04.03P perform cut  cut is performed according to job 
specifications  
C-9.04.04P verify cut parameters and cut quality  cut parameters and cut quality are verified 
for accuracy  
Range of Variables 
manufactured safety devices include: locking pliers, clamps , chain grips  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-9.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of hand tools, 
their characteristics, applications and 
limitations  
identify hand tools, and describe their 
characteristics, applications and 
limitations  
  describe types of cuts, and identify their 
applications  

=== PAGE 81 ===
 
81  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-9.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut materials using hand tools 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting materials 
using hand tools 
  describe procedures to cut materials 
using hand tools 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle cut materials  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, high alloy  
hand tools include: hacksaws, files, snips, pipe cutters, chisels  
types of cuts include: straight, radius  
hazards include: flying debris, cuts, scrapes  
C-9.05 Cuts using portable power tools 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-9.05.01P select speed  speed is selected according to material 
type, grade, thickness, size  and 
manufacturers’ specifications to avoid tool 
damage and injury  
C-9.05.02P measure material to be cut  material to be cut is measured according 
to drawings and specifications  
C-9.05.03P secure material material is secured according to 
manufacturers’ specifications to prevent 
damage to tools and material, and injury 
C-9.05.04P perform cutting or grinding operation  cutting or grinding operation is performed 
according to job specifications  
C-9.05.05P verify cut parameters and cut quality cut parameters and cut quality are verified 
for accuracy  
 

=== PAGE 82 ===
 
82  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-9.05.01L demonstrate knowledge of materials, their 
characteristics and applications  
identify types of materials, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.05.02L demonstrate knowledge of portable 
power tools, their characteristics, 
applications and limitations  
identify portable power tools, and 
describe their characteristics, applications 
and limitations  
  identify types of coolants, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify feed rates, clearances, speed, 
direction, composition and pitch  
  describe types of cuts and their 
applications  
  identify types of discs, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of blades, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-9.05.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut materials using portable power tools 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting materials 
using portable power tools 
  describe procedures to cut materials 
using portable power tools 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle cut materials  
Range of Variables 
types of material include: ferrous and non-ferrous (stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, high alloy)  
portable power tools include: circular and reciprocating saws, angle and die grinders, beveling 
machines, nibblers  
types of cuts include: straight, bevel, radius  
types of discs include: composite, carbide, abrasive  
types of blades include: bi -metal, carbon steel, carbide, diamond  
hazards include: flying debris, sparks, rotating equipment, fire, electrical shocks  

=== PAGE 83 ===
 
83  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task C-10 Uses oxy-fuel gas cutting (OFC) process for cutting and 
gouging  
Task Descriptor 
This task covers the selection and proper use of oxy-fuel equipment for cutting and gouging. Welders 
must be able to select the equipment to use according to the thickness of materials being cut. They must 
also be able to recognize hazards associated with this process.  
This cutting process is cost -effective and versatile, requires no external power source and results in 
quality cuts. The equipment is portable and is used primarily for cutting carbon steel.  
C-10.01 Selects oxy-fuel cutting (OFC) gas and equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-10.01.01P select oxy-fuel cutting (OFC) equipment OFC equipment is selected according to 
task 
C-10.01.02P select type of regulator type of regulator is selected according to 
application and gas type  
C-10.01.03P select type of torch and size of hoses  type of torch and size of hoses are 
selected according to application  
C-10.01.04P select type and size of tip  type and size of tip are selected according 
to material thickness, application and gas 
type 
C-10.01.05P select type of oxy-fuel gases type of oxy-fuel gases is selected 
according to availability and job task  
C-10.01.06P identify and select oxygen and fuel 
cylinders/manifolds  
oxygen and fuel cylinders/manifolds are 
identified according to suppliers’ labels 
and selected according to volumetric 
requirement 
C-10.01.07P select manual or mechanized torch 
cutting systems 
manual or mechanized torch cutting 
systems are selected according to 
application  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, mechanized 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high -pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valve  
types of regulators include: single- and two-stage, low- and high-pressure 
types of oxy-fuel gases include: acetylene, natural gas, propane, methylacetylene-propadiene (MPS), 
oxygen  
cutting systems include: track cutters (motorized carriage), pipe beveling cutters, automated cutting 
table 

=== PAGE 84 ===
 
84  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-10.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe metallurgy of base metals 
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be cut using OFC equipment 
C-10.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of OFC gases 
and equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify OFC gases and equipment, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of OFC 
gases and equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to OFC processes 
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify types of regulators, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify types of oxy-fuel gases, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify oxygen and fuel 
cylinders/manifolds by suppliers’ labels, 
and describe their safety features,  
characteristics and applications  
  describe limitations of oxy-fuel cutting and 
gouging  
  identify manual or mechanized torch 
cutting systems 
C-10.01.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to OFC gases 
and equipment 
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to OFC gases and equipment 
C-10.01.04L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to OFC gases 
identify emerging technologies related to 
OFC gases, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, mechanized 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high -pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valve  
types of regulators include: single- and two-stage, low- and high-pressure 
types of oxy-fuel gases include: acetylene, natural gas, propane, methylacetylene-propadiene (MPS), 
oxygen  
characteristics (of oxy-fuel gas) include: oxygen to fuel gas ratio, maximum flame temperature , heat 
distribution of primary and secondary flame  
cutting systems include: track cutters (motorized carriage), pipe beveling cutters, automated cutting 
table 

=== PAGE 85 ===
 
85  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-10.02 Sets up oxy-fuel cutting (OFC) equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-10.02.01P move and secure oxygen and fuel 
cylinders 
oxygen and fuel cylinders are moved and 
secured to prevent damage to cylinder 
and property, and injury  
C-10.02.02P open cylinder valves and check for debris cylinder valves are opened and debris is 
removed according to manufacturers’ 
specifications  
C-10.02.03P install OFC equipment (components and 
safety devices)  
OFC equipment (components and safety 
devices) are installed according to 
manufacturers’ specifications and 
jurisdictional regulations  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, automated 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high -pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valves  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-10.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of OFC 
equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify OFC equipment, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of OFC 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to OFC process 
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify types of regulators, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify types of oxy-fuel gases, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify oxygen and fuel 
cylinders/manifolds by suppliers’ labels, 
and describe their safety features,  
characteristics and applications  
  identify manual or mechanized torch 
cutting systems 

=== PAGE 86 ===
 
86  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-10.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up OFC equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setup of OFC 
equipment 
  describe procedures to set up OFC 
equipment 
  distinguish between characteristics and 
applications of left- and right-hand threads 
for fuel gas and oxygen  
  describe procedures to secure oxygen 
and fuel cylinders in safe locations  
  identify locations and causes of 
flashbacks, backfires and leaks, and 
methods for prevention and solution  
  describe manufacturers’ specifications 
related to assembly and setup of OFC 
equipment 
C-10.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to OFC gases 
and equipment 
identify standards and regulations 
pertaining to OFC gases and equipment 
C-10.02.04L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to OFC gases  
identify emerging technologies related to 
OFC gases, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, automated 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high -pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valves  
type of regulators include: single- and two-stage, low- and high-pressure  
types of oxy-fuel gases include: acetylene, natural gas, propane, MPS, oxygen  
characteristics (of oxy -fuel gas)  include: thermal volume, temperature output  
cutting systems include: track cutters (motorized carriage), pipe beveling cutters, automated cutting 
table 
hazards include: burns, sparks, eye hazards, fumes, high pressure cylinders, regulator blow-outs, critical 
explosion level, maximum safe working pressures 

=== PAGE 87 ===
 
87  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-10.03 Sets operating parameters for oxy fuel cutting (OFC) equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-10.03.01P adjust working pressures on regulators  working pressures on regulators are 
adjusted according to manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
C-10.03.02P light torch and adjust oxygen  torch is lit and oxygen is adjusted to fuel 
ratio to obtain correct type of flame 
according to application  
C-10.03.03P verify operating parameters, and tip 
selection and operating condition  
operating parameters, and tip selection 
and operating condition are verified by 
performing trial cut and using 
manufacturers’ specifications and 
recommendations  
Range of Variables 
type of flame includes: neutral, carburizing, oxidizing  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-10.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of OFC 
equipment, their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify OFC equipment, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of OFC 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to OFC process 
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify types of flames, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
C-10.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for OFC 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to set operating 
parameters for OFC equipment 
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for OFC equipment 
  describe oxy-fuel pressure requirements 
for cutting  

=== PAGE 88 ===
 
88  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-10.03.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to OFC gases 
and equipment 
identify standards and regulations 
pertaining to OFC gases and equipment 
C-10.03.04L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to OFC gases  
identify emerging technologies related to 
OFC gases, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, automated 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high-pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valves  
type of flame includes: neutral, carburizing, oxidizing  
hazards include: burns, sparks, eye hazards, fumes, high pressure cylinders, regulator blow-outs, critical 
explosion level, maximum safe working pressures  
C-10.04 Performs cut and gouge using OFC equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-10.04.01P start up equipment  equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
C-10.04.02P ignite fuel gas and adjust torch valves  fuel gas is ignited and torch valves are 
adjusted according to type of flame for 
task 
C-10.04.03P pre-heat material to kindling point  material is pre-heated to kindling point to 
initiate cut 
C-10.04.04P perform cut  cut is performed according to task without 
defects or minimal deformations  
C-10.04.05P identify and correct defects  defects are identified and corrected to 
ensure quality of cut  
C-10.04.06P adjust and maintain travel speed and 
torch angle 
travel speed and torch angle are adjusted 
and maintained according to factors to 
achieve a consistent cut or gouge  
C-10.04.07P identify and correct backfire and flashback 
conditions  
backfire and flashback conditions are 
identified and corrected  
C-10.04.08P shut down equipment  equipment is shut down and purged 
according to safe operating procedures 
and manufacturers’ recommendations  
Range of Variables 
type of flame includes: neutral, carburizing, oxidizing  
factors include: base metal, thickness of base metal, heat input  

=== PAGE 89 ===
 
89  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-10.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal metallurgy 
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be cut using OFC equipment 
C-10.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut and gouge using OFC equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting and 
gouging using OFC equipment 
  identify OFC equipment used to cut and 
gouge, and describe their procedures for 
use 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to OFC process 
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify types and sizes of cutting and 
gouging tips, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of flames, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to cut and gouge 
material using OFC equipment 
  describe procedures to identify and 
correct defects  
  describe procedures to adjust and 
maintain travel speed and torch angle  
  describe procedures to correct backfire 
and flashback conditions  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down OFC equipment 
C-10.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to OFC gases 
and equipment 
identify  standards and regulations 
pertaining to OFC gases and equipment 
C-10.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of emerging 
technologies related to OFC gases  
identify emerging technologies related to 
OFC gases, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
Range of Variables 
OFC equipment includes: torches, hoses, flashback arrestors, regulators, torch bodies, tips, automated 
oxy-fuel cutting equipment (bevellers, track cutters), fuel cylinders/manifolds, high-pressure cylinders, 
reverse-flow check valves  
hazards include: burns, sparks, eye hazards, fumes, high pressure cylinders, regulator blow-outs, critical 
explosion level, maximum safe working pressures, confined space (release of explosive gas, 
asphyxiation)  
type of flame includes: neutral, carburizing, oxidizing  

=== PAGE 90 ===
 
90  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task C-11 Uses plasma arc cutting (PAC) process for cutting and 
gouging  
Task Descriptor 
Welders use the PAC process to cut ferrous and non-ferrous material; it provides clean cuts with minimal 
distortion and a small heat-affected zone in the material. Typically, this process requires minimal clean-up 
following the cutting operation.  
C-11.01 Selects PAC equipment and consumables 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-11.01.01P select PAC equipment and components PAC equipment and components are 
selected according to application, 
amperage range, thickness and type of 
material 
C-11.01.02P select PAC consumables PAC consumables are selected 
according to cutting or gouging 
requirements 
C-11.01.03P select air or gas  air or gas is selected according to type of 
material, application and quality of cut or 
gouge 
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrod es, constricting nozzles (tips)  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-11.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal metallurgy 

=== PAGE 91 ===
 
91  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-11.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of PAC 
equipment and components, their 
consumables, characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify PAC equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to PAC process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  describe operating principles of PAC 
equipment 
  interpret information pertaining to gouging 
using PAC systems found in  drawings 
and specifications  
  identify PAC consumables, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe fundamentals of PAC process  
  identify power sources, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe compressed air and gas supply 
characteristics and applications  
  identify air dryers and filters required on 
compressed air supply  
  identify coolant level for liquid -cooled 
equipment 
  describe travel speed  
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp   
consumables include: electrod es, constricting nozzles (tips)  
C-11.02 Sets up PAC equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-11.02.01P visually inspect PAC equipment and 
components for damage  
PAC equipment and components are 
visually inspected for damage  
C-11.02.02P assemble PAC consumables on torch 
head 
PAC consumables are assembled on 
torch head according to manufacturers’ 
specifications or recommendations  
C-11.02.03P connect torch to power source  torch is connected to power source  

=== PAGE 92 ===
 
92  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-11.02.04P set up regulator  regulator is set up according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
C-11.02.05P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to ensure proper electrical connection  
C-11.02.06P adjust power supply  power supply is adjusted according to 
base metal application  
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrod es, constricting nozzles (tips)  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-11.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of PAC 
equipment and components, their 
consumables, characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify PAC equipment, components 
and consumables, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of PAC 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to PAC process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify regulators, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
C-11.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up PAC equipment, components 
and consumables 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting up PAC 
equipment 
  describe procedures to set up PAC 
equipment, components and 
consumables 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle components and consumables 
C-11.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
certification requirements for PAC 
equipment 
identify training and certification 
requirements for PAC equipment 
  identify training and certification 
requirements and limitations pertaining to 
setting up primary wiring for PAC 
equipment 

=== PAGE 93 ===
 
93  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrodes, constricting nozzles (tips)  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation  
C-11.03 Sets operating parameters for PAC equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-11.03.01P set amperage amperage is set according to base metal 
grade and thickness  
C-11.03.02P set air pressure air pressure is set according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
C-11.03.03P set travel speed  travel speed is set on semi-automatic and 
automatic PAC equipment according to 
material type and thickness  
C-11.03.04P verify for cut defects  cut defects are verified by performing trial 
cut and using manufacturers’ 
specifications and recommendations  
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-11.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of PAC 
equipment and components, their 
consumables, characteristics, 
applications and operation  
identify PAC equipment, components 
and consumables, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of PAC 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to PAC process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify amperages, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify amount of air pressure required, 
and describe its effects on cut or gouge  

=== PAGE 94 ===
 
94  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  identify travel speed required, and 
describe its effects on cut or gouge  
C-11.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for PAC 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for  PAC equipment 
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for PAC equipment 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle components and consumables 
  identify safe working pressures  
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrodes, constricting nozzles (tips)  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation  
C-11.04 Performs cut and gouge using PAC equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-11.04.01P start up equipment  equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
C-11.04.02P apply PAC techniques PAC techniques are applied 
C-11.04.03P identify and correct defects  defects are identified and corrected to 
ensure quality of cut or gouge  
C-11.04.04P replace damaged or worn PAC 
equipment, components and 
consumables 
damaged or worn PAC equipment, 
components and consumables are 
replaced 
C-11.04.05P adjust and maintain travel speed  travel speed is adjusted and maintained 
taking into consideration factors to 
achieve consistent cut or gouge  
C-11.04.06P identify equipment malfunctions  equipment malfunctions are identified 
and corrected  
C-11.04.07P use jigs and guides during cutting 
operations  
jigs and guides are used during cutting 
operations  
C-11.04.08P shut down equipment  equipment is shut down according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  

=== PAGE 95 ===
 
95  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
PAC techniques include: initiating the arc and cut, starting at the correct stand -off distance  
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrodes, constricting nozzles (tips)  
factors include: type and thickness of base metal, heat input 
malfunctions include: low gas pressure, inadequate or poor work lead connection  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-11.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal metallurgy 
C-11.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut using PAC equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting and 
gouging using PAC equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to PAC process  
found on drawings and specifications  
C-11.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up PAC equipment, components 
and consumables 
identify PAC equipment, components 
and consumables used to cut and 
gouge, and describe procedures for use  
  describe procedures and techniques to 
cut and gouge material using PAC 
equipment 
  describe procedures to identify and 
correct defects  
  describe procedures to adjust and 
maintain travel speed and torch angl  
  identify cutting aids, jigs and guides used 
during cutting operations, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down PAC equipment 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle PAC components and 
consumables 
Range of Variables 
PAC equipment includes: power source, track and pipe beveling cutters, manual, semi -automatic, 
automatic, shields, compressor  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation  
components include: heat shield, torch bodies, hoses, work lead clamp  
consumables include: electrodes, constricting nozzles (tips)  
PAC techniques include: initiating the arc and cut, starting at the correct stand -off distance  
cutting aids include: stand -off, circle cutting attachments, drag nozzle  

=== PAGE 96 ===
 
96  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task C-12 Uses air carbon arc cutting (CAC -A) process for cutting 
and gouging  
Task Descriptor 
The CAC-A process is used for bevel preparation and removing welds. It can also be used for back 
gouging. This process is a fast and efficient method of gouging metals. It is also used for removing 
cracks, repair and demolition.  
C-12.01 Selects CAC-A equipment and consumables  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-12.01.01P select CAC-A equipment and 
components 
CAC-A equipment and components are 
selected according to application, 
amperage range, thickness and type of 
material 
C-12.01.02P select power source  power source is selected according to 
application  
C-12.01.03P select gouging torches and work lead 
clamps 
gouging torches and work lead clamps 
are selected according to amperage and 
size of electrode  
C-12.01.04P select type of carbon electrode type of carbon electrode is selected 
according to application and base metal  
C-12.01.05P select size of carbon electrodes  size of carbon electrodes is selected 
according to amount of material to be 
removed 
C-12.01.06P select air supply  air supply with sufficient volume and 
pressure is selected according to 
application  
Range of Variables 
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
types of carbon electrodes include: coated, non-coated, flat, round, half-round, alternating current (AC), 
direct current (DC) 

=== PAGE 97 ===
 
97  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-12.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal metallurgy 
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be cut or gouged using CAC-A 
equipment 
C-12.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of CAC-A 
equipment and components, and types 
of carbon electrodes, their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
identify CAC-A equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of CAC-A 
equipment 
  identify types of carbon electrodes, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to CAC-A process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify power sources, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of torches and work lead 
clamps, and describe their characteristics 
and applications  
  identify amount of air pressure required, 
and describe its effects on cuts or gouges 
Range of Variables 
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
types of carbon electrodes include: coated, non-coated, flat, round, half-round, alternating current (AC), 
direct current (DC) 

=== PAGE 98 ===
 
98  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-12.02 Sets up CAC-A equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-12.02.01P visually inspect equipment and 
components for damage  
equipment and components are visually 
inspected for damage  
C-12.02.02P attach CAC-A components to power 
source 
CAC-A components are attached to 
power source according to manufacturers’ 
recommendations, current type and 
application  
C-12.02.03P attach CAC-A components to air supply  CAC-A components are attached to air 
supply  
C-12.02.04P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to ensure proper electrical connection  
Range of Variables 
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-12.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of CAC-A 
equipment and components, their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
identify CAC-A equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to CAC-A process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify power sources, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify amount of air pressure required, 
and describe its effects on cuts or gouges 
C-12.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up CAC-A equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setup of CAC-A 
equipment 
  describe procedures to set up CAC-A 
equipment and components 
  describe procedures to control waste  
Range of Variables 
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation, molten material  

=== PAGE 99 ===
 
99  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-12.03 Sets operating parameters for CAC -A equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-12.03.01P set amperage amperage is set according to size, shape, 
type of carbon electrodes and 
manufacturers’ specifications  
C-12.03.02P adjust regulator  regulator is adjusted to provide sufficient 
air pressure to CAC-A components 
C-12.03.03P verify operating parameters and electrode 
selection 
operating parameters and electrode 
selection are verified by performing trial 
cut or gouge a nd using manufacturers’ 
specifications and recommendations  
Range of Variables  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-12.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of CAC-A 
equipment, components and electrodes, 
their characteristics, applications and 
operation 
identify CAC-A equipment, components 
and electrodes , and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of CAC-A 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to CAC-A process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  identify electrical characteristics of 
CAC-A equipment and electrodes, and 
describe their applications  
C-12.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for CAC-A 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for CAC-A equipment 
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for CAC-A equipment 
Range of Variables  
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
electrical characteristics include: current type, duty cycle  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation, molten material  

=== PAGE 100 ===
 
100  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-12.04 Performs cut and gouge using CAC-A equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
C-12.04.01P start up CAC-A equipment CAC-A equipment is started up 
according to safe operating procedures 
and manufacturers’ recommendations  
C-12.04.02P insert electrode into holder  electrode is inserted into holder according 
to operating procedures  
C-12.04.03P maintain electrode to work angle  electrode to work angle is maintained 
according to application 
C-12.04.04P adjust carbon electrode stick -out during 
use 
carbon electrode stick -out is adjusted 
during use according to manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
C-12.04.05P maintain travel speed  travel speed is maintained according to 
application 
C-12.04.06P identify defects after gouging  defects are identified according to 
inspection after gouging  
C-12.04.07P clean material material is cleaned after gouging using 
grinding techniques  
C-12.04.08P shut down CAC-A equipment CAC-A equipment is shut down 
according to safe operating procedures 
and manufacturers’ recommendations  
Range of Variables 
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
application includes: depth and width of gouge, cutting, removing material  
defects include: copper and carbon deposits, poor gouge quality  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
C-12.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal metallurgy 
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be cut or gouged using CAC-A process  

=== PAGE 101 ===
 
101  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
C-12.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
cut and gouge using CAC-A equipment, 
components and process  
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to cutting and 
gouging using CAC-A process  
  identify CAC-A equipment and 
components used to cut and gouge, and 
describe their procedures for use  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to CAC-A process  
found on drawings and specifications  
  describe procedures to cut and gouge 
material using CAC-A process  
  describe procedures to adjust and 
maintain travel speed and torch angle 
  describe procedures to identify defects 
after gouging  
  describe procedures to clean material 
using grinding techniques  
  describe procedures to shut down CAC-A 
equipment 
  describe procedures to control waste  
Range of Variables 
CAC-A equipment includes: power source, compressor  
components include: hoses, electrode holder, cables, work lead clamp  
hazards include: fumes, burns, sparks, electrical shocks, noise, radiation, molten material  
defects include: copper and carbon deposits, poor gouge quality  
  

=== PAGE 102 ===
 
102  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Major Work Activity D  
Performs welding processes 
Task D-13 Welds using shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) process  
Task Descriptor 
SMAW is a commonly used process for joining most ferrous and some non-ferrous metals. Even though it 
is one of the slowest of the welding processes, it is readily available, easily accessible, very reliable, 
versatile and portable, and therefore it is widely used.  
D-13.01 Selects SMAW equipment and consumables 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-13.01.01P select power source power source is selected according to 
application and primary power supply 
availability  
D-13.01.02P select electrode type and diameter  electrode type and diameter are selected 
according to base metal thickness and 
composition, joint type and position , and 
WPS/WPDS to ensure fusion and avoid 
weld discontinuities  
D-13.01.03P select components components are selected according to 
application  
Range of Variables 
power source [constant current (CC) capable] includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers  
components include: work lead clamps, electrode holders, cables, remote controls  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-13.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using SMAW equipment  

=== PAGE 103 ===
 
103  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-13.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of SMAW 
processes, equipment, components 
consumables, and their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
describe fundamentals of SMAW process 
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify SMAW equipment, components 
and consumables, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe storage requirements for SMAW 
electrodes  
  identify SMAW electrodes, and describe 
their classifications, characteristics, 
flux coating composition, and 
applications  
  identify components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of SMAW 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to SMAW 
equipment, components and 
consumables found on drawings and 
specifications  
D-13.01.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements for SMAW  
identify training and qualification 
requirements for SMAW  
  identify training and certification 
requirements and limitations pertaining to 
setting up primary wiring for SMAW 
equipment 
D-13.01.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to SMAW 
equipment, components and 
consumables  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to SMAW equipment, 
components and consumables  
Range of Variables 
components include: work lead clamps, electrode holders, cables, remote controls  
power source [constant current (CC) capable] includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers  
classifications include: American Welding Society (AWS), Canadian Standards Association (CSA), 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), (tensile strength, position, composition, F-numbers) 
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition, fast freezing, fast fill, freeze fill  
flux coating composition includes: rutile (titania), cellulose, low -hydrogen (basic), iron -powder 

=== PAGE 104 ===
 
104  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-13.02 Sets up SMAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-13.02.01P identify damage and defects in SMAW 
equipment and components 
damage and defects in SMAW equipment 
and components are identified  
D-13.02.02P select machine settings on power source machine settings on power source are 
selected according to SMAW process  
D-13.02.03P set required current type  required current type is set by adjusting 
selector switch or connecting cables 
(leads) to appropriate terminals  
D-13.02.04P connect electrode holders (stingers) and 
work lead clamps to cables  
electrode holders (stingers) and work lead 
clamps are connected to cables  
D-13.02.05P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to complete circuit  
D-13.02.06P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
and position  
Range of Variables 
components include: work lead clamps, electrode holders, cables, remote controls  
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-13.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of SMAW 
processes, equipment, components and 
their characteristics, applications and 
operation 
describe fundamentals of SMAW process 
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify SMAW equipment and 
components and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of SMAW 
equipment 
  describe procedures to refuel and perform 
general maintenance checks of engine -
driven power sources  

=== PAGE 105 ===
 
105  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
components include: work lead clamps, electrode holders, cables, remote controls  
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers  
D-13.03 Sets operating parameters for SMAW equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-13.03.01P determine parameters parameters are determined according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-13.03.02P set/adjust amperage  amperage is set/adjusted according to 
base metal thickness and electrode type 
and size 
D-13.03.03P set and adjust additional machine 
options 
additional machine options are set and 
adjusted according to application  
D-13.03.04P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
and position  
Range of Variables 
machine options include: arc force (dig) , hot start  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-13.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of SMAW 
processes, equipment, components and 
their characteristics, applications and 
operation 
describe fundamentals of SMAW process 
  identify SMAW equipment and 
components and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify welding components, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of SMAW 
equipment 

=== PAGE 106 ===
 
106  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to SMAW 
equipment found on drawings and 
specifications  
  describe metric and imperial electrode 
designations  
D-13.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for SMAW 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for SMAW equipment  
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for SMAW equipment  
  describe procedures to set/adjust 
additional machine options for SMAW 
equipment 
Range of Variables 
components include: work lead clamps, electrode holders, cables, remote controls  
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers  
hazards include: fumes, electrical shocks, ultraviolet (UV) and infrared light, visible light rays, burns, 
flying debris  
machine options include: arc force (dig), hot start  
D-13.04 Performs weld using SMAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-13.04.01P start up equipment  equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
D-13.04.02P strike arc and manipulate electrode  arc is struck and electrode is manipulated 
while maintaining arc length, electrode 
angle and travel speed  
D-13.04.03P perform electrode manipulation 
techniques 
electrode manipulation techniques are 
performed  
D-13.04.04P perform tacking, backstepping and 
sequencing techniques  
tacking, backstepping and sequencing 
techniques are performed according to 
application, and controlling heat distortion 
D-13.04.05P adjust travel speed and angle  travel speed and angle are adjusted 
taking into consideration factors to 
maintain a consistent weld profile  
D-13.04.06P stop arc  arc is stopped ensuring proper tie-ins and 
avoiding weld discontinuities  

=== PAGE 107 ===
 
107  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-13.04.07P remove slag using tools slag is removed using tools 
D-13.04.08P identify weld discontinuities  weld discontinuities are identified by 
performing visual inspection  
D-13.04.09P determine cause of weld discontinuities 
and defects  
cause of weld discontinuities and defects 
are determined by troubleshooting SMAW 
equipment, process and electrode 
manipulation techniques 
D-13.04.10P repair weld discontinuities  weld discontinuities are repaired by 
grinding/gouging and re -welding 
D-13.04.11P  re-start arc arc is re-started ensuring proper tie -ins 
and avoiding weld discontinuities and 
defects  
D-13.04.12P  finish weld  weld is finished showing proper tie -ins in 
all positions and containing no 
unacceptable weld discontinuities and 
defects  
D-13.04.13P  shut down equipment  equipment is shut down according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
Range of Variables 
electrode manipulation techniques include: whip, using backhand and forehand techniques to achieve 
desired bead width and shape (weave and stringer) to direct heat; and control penetration and build -up 
factors include: base metal, joint configuration, position, heat input, WPS/WPDS  
tools include: wire wheels, chipping hammers, wire brushes 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-13.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using SMAW process  
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-13.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
weld using SMAW equipment  
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to welding using 
SMAW equipment  
  identify SMAW equipment used to weld, 
and describe their procedures for use  
  identify types of welds, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down equipment  

=== PAGE 108 ===
 
108  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe electrode manipulation 
techniques 
  identify SMAW electrodes, and describe 
their classifications, characteristics, 
flux coating composition, and 
applications  
  identify weld position 
  identify  joint configurations 
  identify  electrical characteristics 
  describe procedures to maintain travel 
speed, electrode angle and heat inputs  
  describe pre -heating, post -heating and 
interpass temperature requirements for 
base metals 
  describe techniques to repair weld 
discontinuities and defects  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle SMAW equipment, components 
and consumables  
D-13.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements to weld using 
SMAW equipment  
identify training and qualification 
requirements to weld using SMAW 
equipment 
D-13.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to welding using 
SMAW process  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to welding using SMAW 
process  
Range of Variables 
hazards include: burns, flying debris, fumes, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, UV and infrared 
light, visible light rays  
types of welds include: fillet, groove, plug, slot, surfacing  
electrode manipulation techniques include: whip, using backhand and forehand techniques to achieve 
desired bead width and shape (weave and stringer) to direct heat; and control penetration and build -up 
classifications include: AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, position, composition, F -numbers) 
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition, fast freezing, fast fill, freeze fill  
flux coating composition includes: rutile (titania), cellulose, low -hydrogen (basic), iron -powder 
weld position includes: flat, horizontal, vertical, overhead, 1G, 2G, 5G, 6G 
joint configurations include: butt, tee, edge, corner, lap  
electrical characteristics include: current type, duty cycle, amperage  

=== PAGE 109 ===
 
109  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task D-14 Welds using flux cored arc welding (FCAW), metal cored 
arc welding (MCAW) and gas metal arc welding (GMAW) processes 
Task Descriptor 
The FCAW is a semi-automatic process that uses tubular wire with a granular flux core, which can be gas 
shielded or self shielded. It is widely used in production shops because, compared to SMAW and GTAW 
processes, it has high productivity, low operating c ost and high efficiency.  
The MCAW process uses a tubular wire with a powdered metal core. Some of the advantages of this 
process include no slag produced, very little spatter and interpass cleaning required, and a very high 
deposition rate. It is used in similar applications as th e FCAW process.  
The GMAW process uses solid wire for welding metals and their alloys. It is used for applications such as 
sheet metal, structural steel and piping. It has a low distortion rate, a high deposition rate and requires 
minimal cleaning.  
These processes typically use a constant voltage (CV) power source and a wire feeder that supplies 
continuously fed wire.  
D-14.01 Selects FCAW, MCAW and GMAW gas, equipment and consumables  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-14.01.01P select power source power source is selected according to 
application and primary power supply 
availability  
D-14.01.02P select wire type and diameter wire type and diameter are selected 
according to base metal thickness and 
composition, joint type and position and 
WPS/WPDS to ensure fusion and avoid 
weld discontinuities  
D-14.01.03P select FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW equipment 
and components are selected according 
to application  
D-14.01.04P  select shielding gas shielding gas is selected according to 
factors 
Range of Variables 
power sources include: CV capable machines (inverters, rectifiers, generator);  constant current (CC) 
machine with voltage sensing wire feeder  
wire type includes: solid and tubular wire, self -shielded 
equipment and components include: guns (air -cooled, water -cooled), nozzles, contact tips,  wire 
feeders, drive rolls, gas diffusers, liners, work lead clamps, regulators/flow meters, gas lines  
shielding gas includes: CO2, argon, helium, mixed gases  
factors include: base metal composition, process, WPS/WPDS, mode of transfer, position, density-to-air 
ratio 

=== PAGE 110 ===
 
110  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-14.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using FCAW, MCAW and 
GMAW processes  
  identify ferrous and non-ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-14.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes, gas, equipment, 
components and consumables, and 
their, characteristics, applications and 
operation 
describe fundamentals of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes  
  identify FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify FCAW, MCAW and GMAW wires 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify shielding gases, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
  describe digital technology used in 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW processes  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: guns (air -cooled, water -cooled), nozzles, contact tips,  wire 
feeders, drive rolls, gas diffusers, liners, work lead clamps, regulators/flow meters, gas lines  
wire type includes: solid and tubular wire, self -shielded 
shielding gas includes: CO2, argon, helium, mixed gases  
power sources include: CV capable machines (inverters, rectifiers, generator);  constant current (CC) 
machine with voltage sensing wire feeder  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets 

=== PAGE 111 ===
 
111  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-14.02 Sets up FCAW, MCAW and GMAW equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-14.02.01P identify damage and defects in FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
damage and defects in FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW equipment are identified  
D-14.02.02P set machine settings  machine settings are set according to 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW process  
D-14.02.03P set required current type  required current type is set by adjusting 
selector switch or connecting cables 
(leads) to appropriate terminals  
D-14.02.04P assemble gun components and connect 
gun to wire feeder  
gun components are assembled and 
gun is connected to wire feeder  
D-14.02.05P connect regulator to gas supply and gas 
hose to wire feeder  
regulator is connected to gas supply and 
gas hose to wire feeder according to 
electrode selection  
D-14.02.06P install wire roll in wire feeder  wire roll is installed in wire feeder  
D-14.02.07P feed wire through drive rolls, liner and 
gun, and clip end of wire for appropriate 
stick-out 
wire is fed through drive rolls, liner and 
gun, and end of wire is clipped for 
appropriate stick -out according to 
manufacturers’ specifications  
D-14.02.08P adjust wire drive roll tension  wire drive roll tension is adjusted 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
to achieve a consistent rate of wire feed  
D-14.02.09P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to complete circuit  
D-14.02.10P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
and position  
Range of Variables 
gun components include: gas diffusers, contact tips, nozzles 

=== PAGE 112 ===
 
112  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-14.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes, gas, equipment, 
components and consumables, and 
their, characteristics, applications and 
operation 
describe fundamentals of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes  
  identify power source 
  identify FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  identify types of wire for FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify shielding gases, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment 
D-14.02.02L  demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to FCAW, MCAW and 
GMAW equipment and components 
  describe procedures to set up FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment and 
components 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components 
  describe digital technology used in 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW processes  
D-14.02.03L  demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements pertaining to 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW equipment 
and components 
identify training and qualification 
requirements pertaining to FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW equipment and 
components 
  identify training and certification 
requirements and limitations pertaining to 
setting up primary wiring for FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment 
D-14.02.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW equipment and 
components 
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components 

=== PAGE 113 ===
 
113  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: guns (air -cooled, water -cooled), nozzles, contact tips,  wire 
feeders, drive rolls, gas diffusers, liners, work lead clamps, regulators/flow meters, gas lines  
power sources include: CV capable machines (inverters, rectifiers, generator); CC machine with voltage 
sensing wire feeder  
types of wire include: solid and tubular wire, self -shielded 
shielding gases include: CO2, argon, helium, mixed gases  
hazards include: pinch points, burns, electrical burns, electrical shocks, falling objects, moving parts, 
asphyxiation, ozone and phosgene gases, UV and infrared light, visible light rays  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets 
D-14.03 Sets operating parameters for FCAW, MCAW and GMAW  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-14.03.01P determine parameters parameters are determined according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-14.03.02P set wire feed speed and voltage  wire feed speed and voltage are set 
according to WPS/WPDS and application 
D-14.03.03P set gas flow rate  gas flow rate is set according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-14.03.04P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
and position  
 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-14.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes, equipment, 
components, and their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
describe fundamentals of FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW processes  
  identify FCAW, MCAW and GMAW 
equipment and components, and 
describe their characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to FCAW, MCAW 
and GMAW equipment found on drawings 
and specifications  

=== PAGE 114 ===
 
114  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe metric and imperial electrode 
designations  
D-14.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment  
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for FCAW, MCAW and 
GMAW equipment 
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for FCAW, MCAW and 
GMAW equipment 
  identify modes of transfer 
  identify operational working pressures  
  describe digital technology used in 
FCAW, MCAW and GMAW processes  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: guns (air -cooled, water -cooled), nozzles, contact tips,  wire 
feeders, drive rolls, gas diffusers, liners, work lead clamps, regulators/flow meters, gas lines  
hazards include: burns, electrical burns, electrical shocks, moving parts, asphyxiation, fumes, ozone and 
phosgene gases, UV and infrared light, visible light rays  
modes of transfer include: short circuit, globular, spray, pulse spray  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets 
D-14.04 Performs weld using FCAW, MCAW and GMAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-14.04.01P start up equipment equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
D-14.04.02P start arc and manipulate electrode  arc is started and electrode is 
manipulated while maintaining electrode 
angle and travel speed  
D-14.04.03P perform wire manipulation techniques  wire manipulation techniques are 
performed  
D-14.04.04P perform tacking, backstepping and 
sequencing techniques  
tacking, backstepping and sequencing 
techniques are performed according to 
application and code, and controlling heat 
distortion  
D-14.04.05P adjust travel speed and angle  travel speed and angle are adjusted 
taking into consideration factors to 
maintain a consistent weld profile  

=== PAGE 115 ===
 
115  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-14.04.06P stop arc  arc is stopped ensuring proper tie-ins and 
avoiding weld discontinuities  
D-14.04.07P remove slag using tools slag is removed using tools 
D-14.04.08P identify weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
identified by performing visual inspection 
D-14.04.09P determine cause of weld discontinuities 
and defects  
cause of weld discontinuities and defects 
are determined by troubleshooting FCAW, 
MCAW and GMAW equipment, process 
and wire manipulation techniques 
D-14.04.10P repair weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
repaired by grinding/gouging and re -
welding 
D-14.04.11P re-start arc arc is re-started ensuring proper tie -ins 
and avoiding weld discontinuities  
D-14.04.12P finish weld  weld is finished showing proper tie -ins in 
all positions and containing no 
unacceptable welding discontinuities  
D-14.04.13P shut down equipment  equipment is shut down according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
Range of Variables 
wire manipulation techniques include: using backhand and forehand techniques to achieve desired 
bead width and shape (weave and stringer) to direct heat, and control penetration and build -up 
tacking includes: penetrating, bridge  
factors include: base metal, joint configuration, position, heat input, WPS/WPDS  
tools include: wire wheels, chipping hammers, wire brushes, grinding discs, air chippers, needle guns  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-14.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using GMAW, MCAW and 
FCAW processes  
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  

=== PAGE 116 ===
 
116  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-14.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
weld using GMAW, MCAW and FCAW 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to welding using 
GMAW, MCAW and FCAW equipment  
  identify GMAW, MCAW and FCAW 
equipment used to weld, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify types of welds, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down equipment  
  describe wire manipulation techniques 
  identify GMAW, MCAW and FCAW 
electrodes, and describe their 
classifications, characteristics, flux 
composition and applications  
  identify weld position 
  identify  joint configurations 
  identify  electrical characteristics 
  identify modes of transfer 
  describe procedures to maintain travel 
speed, electrode angle and heat inputs 
  describe pre -heating, post -heating and 
interpass temperature requirements for 
base metals 
  describe techniques to repair weld 
discontinuities  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle GMAW, MCAW and FCAW 
equipment, components and 
consumables  
D-14.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements to weld using 
GMAW, MCAW and FCAW equipment 
identify training and qualification 
requirements to weld using GMAW, 
MCAW and FCAW equipment 
D-14.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to welding using 
GMAW, MCAW and FCAW processes  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to welding using GMAW, 
MCAW and FCAW processes  
Range of Variables 
hazards include: burns, flying debris, fumes, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, UV and infrared 
light, visible light rays  
types of welds include: fillet, groove, plug, slot, surfacing  
wire manipulation techniques include: using backhand and forehand techniques to achieve desired 
bead width and shape (weave and stringer) to direct heat, and control penetration and build -up 
classifications include: AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, position, composition, F -numbers) 

=== PAGE 117 ===
 
117  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition  
flux composition (MCAW, FCAW) includes: rutile, low -hydrogen (basic)  
weld position includes: flat, horizontal, vertical, overhead  
joint configurations include: butt, tee, edge, corner, lap  
electrical characteristics include: current type, wire feed speed (amperage), voltage  
modes of transfer include: short circuit, globular, spray, pulse spray  
Task D-15 Welds using gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) process 
Task Descriptor 
The GTAW process uses a non-consumable tungsten electrode and may include the use of a hand-fed 
filler rod. It provides high quality welds and requires minimal clean-up. It welds most ferrous and non -
ferrous metals. It requires the most dexterity of all we lding processes.  
D-15.01 Selects GTAW gas, equipment and consumables 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-15.01.01P select power source power source is selected according to 
application and primary power supply 
availability  
D-15.01.02P select GTAW gas, equipment, 
components and consumables  
GTAW gas, equipment, components 
and consumables are selected according 
to factors and application  
D-15.01.03P select shielding gas shielding gas is selected taking into 
consideration factors 
D-15.01.04P select purging equipment  purging equipment is selected according 
to application and base metal  
D-15.01.05P select tungsten electrode and filler rod 
compositions and diameters  
tungsten electrode and filler rod 
compositions and diameters are selected 
taking into consideration base metal 
thickness and composition, joint type, 
position and WPS/WPDS to ensure fusion 
and avoid weld discontinuities  

=== PAGE 118 ===
 
118  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers, high -frequency 
option, AC option  
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
factors (for selecting equipment and components) include: joint type, shielding gas, base metal, welding 
position, WPS/WPDS  
shielding gas includes: argon, helium, mixed gases 
factors (for selecting shielding gas) include: base metal composition, WPS/WPDS, welding position  
tungsten electrodes include: pure, thoriated, zirconiated, lanthanated, ceriated, rare earth  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-15.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that have specialized 
applications for using GTAW equipment 
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-15.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of GTAW 
processes, gas, equipment, 
components and consumables, and their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
describe fundamentals of GTAW process 
  identify GTAW equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of tungsten electrodes and 
filler rod, and describe their characteristics 
and applications  
  identify shielding gases, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify purging equipment, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of GTAW 
equipment 
  describe digital technology used in 
GTAW processes  

=== PAGE 119 ===
 
119  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
tungsten electrodes include: pure, thoriated, zirconiated, lanthanated, ceriated, rare earth  
shielding gas includes: argon, helium, mixed gases 
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers, high -frequency 
option, AC option  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets 
D-15.02 Sets up GTAW equipment  
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-15.02.01P identify damage and defects in GTAW 
equipment and components 
damage and defects in GTAW equipment 
and components are identified  
D-15.02.02P set machine settings machine settings are set according to 
GTAW process and high frequency 
settings used according to application and 
WPS 
D-15.02.03P connect work lead clamp and torch to 
power source  
work lead clamp and torch are connected 
to power source  
D-15.02.04P connect regulator/flow meter to gas 
supply and hoses  
regulator/flow meter is connected to gas 
supply and hoses  
D-15.02.05P assemble equipment and components 
and connect assembly to power source  
equipment and components are 
assembled and assembly is connected to 
power source 
D-15.02.06P shape end of tungsten electrode and 
adjust stick -out 
end of tungsten electrode is shaped and 
stick-out is adjusted according to joint 
configuration and base metal  
D-15.02.07P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to complete circuit  
D-15.02.08P dam and purge weld area  weld area is dammed and purged taking 
into consideration factors  
D-15.02.09P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
filler metal and position  

=== PAGE 120 ===
 
120  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
machine settings include: AC, DC, scratch start, lift start, high frequency start, pre-purge, post purge 
pulse, AC balance, AC frequency, AC for sine wave, amperage, current type  
tungsten electrodes include: pure, thoriated, zirconiated, lanthanated, ceriated, rare earth blends  
factors (for damming and purging work area) include: base metal composition, joint  configuration, 
position, WPS/WPDS  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-15.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of GTAW 
processes, gas, equipment, 
components and consumables, and their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
describe fundamentals of GTAW 
processes  
  identify power source 
  identify GTAW equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of torches, and describe 
their components, characteristics and 
applications  
  identify types of regulators/flow meters, 
cylinders and hoses, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of filler metals, and 
describe their classifications, 
characteristics and applications  
  identify types of tungsten electrodes, 
and describe their colour codes, 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of GTAW 
equipment and components 
D-15.02.02L  demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up GTAW equipment and 
components 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to GTAW equipment 
and components 
  describe procedures to set up GTAW 
equipment and components 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle GTAW equipment and 
components 
  describe damming and purging methods 
and applications  
  describe procedures to refuel and perform 
general maintenance checks of engine -
driven power sources  

=== PAGE 121 ===
 
121  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  describe digital technology used in 
GTAW processes  
D-15.02.03L  demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements pertaining to 
GTAW equipment and components 
identify training and qualification 
requirements pertaining to GTAW 
equipment and components 
D-15.02.04L  demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to GTAW 
equipment and components 
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to GTAW equipment and 
components 
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
power source (CC capable) includes: inverters, rectifiers, generators, transformers, high -frequency 
option, AC option  
types of torches include: air-cooled and liquid -cooled  
types of filler metals include: rods, wire, consumable inserts  
tungsten electrodes include: pure, thoriated, zirconiated, lanthanated, ceriated, rare earth blends  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, 
electromagnetic field (EMF), UV and infrared light, visible light rays, radiation  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets 
D-15.03 Sets operating parameters for GTAW 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-15.03.01P determine parameters parameters are determined according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-15.03.02P set amperage, current type and frequency 
to match parameters  
amperage, current type and frequency are 
set to match parameters according to 
base metal type and thickness, size and 
composition of filler metal, and position of 
weld 
D-15.03.03P set shielding gas flow rate including pre - 
and post -flow time  
shielding gas flow rate, including pre- and 
post -flow time, is set according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-15.03.04P set up damming and purging  damming and purging is set up according 
to WPS/WPDS, application and base 
metal 
D-15.03.05P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
filler metal and position  
 

=== PAGE 122 ===
 
122  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-15.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of GTAW 
processes, gas, equipment, 
components and consumables, and their 
characteristics, applications and operation 
describe fundamentals of GTAW 
processes  
  identify GTAW equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of GTAW 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to GTAW 
equipment found on drawings and 
specifications  
  describe metric and imperial designations 
D-15.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for GTAW 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for GTAW equipment 
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for GTAW equipment  
  identify amperage controls, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify start options 
  identify AC balance  
  identify current type  
  identify operational working pressures and 
flow rates  
  describe digital technology used in 
GTAW processes  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, 
electromagnetic field (EMF), UV and infrared light, visible light rays 
amperage controls include: foot pedal, thumb control, remote , power source controls  
start options include: scratch start, lift arc, high frequency  
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real-time monitoring, pre -sets, frequency, pulse  

=== PAGE 123 ===
 
123  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-15.04 Performs weld using GTAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-15.04.01P start up equipment  equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
D-15.04.02P clean base metal and filler metal  base metal and filler metal are cleaned 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
and recommendations, material and safe 
work practices 
D-15.04.03P start arc, and manipulate tungsten 
electrode (torch) and filler metal  
arc is started, and tungsten electrode 
(torch) and filler metal are manipulated 
while maintaining arc length, angles, and 
travel speed  
D-15.04.04P adjust amperage  amperage is adjusted with amperage 
controls 
D-15.04.05P perform torch manipulation techniques 
and filler metal manipulation techniques  
torch manipulation techniques and filler 
metal manipulation techniques are 
performed  
D-15.04.06P perform tacking, backstepping and 
sequencing techniques  
tacking, backstepping and sequencing 
techniques are performed according to 
application and code, and controlling heat 
distortion  
D-15.04.07P adjust travel speed and angle  travel speed and angle are adjusted 
taking into consideration factors to 
maintain a consistent weld profile  
D-15.04.08P stop arc  arc is stopped ensuring proper tie-ins and 
avoiding weld discontinuities  
D-15.04.09P clean welded areas using tools welding areas are cleaned using tools 
according to application  
D-15.04.10P identify weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
identified by performing visual inspection 
D-15.04.11P determine cause of weld discontinuities 
and defects  
cause of weld discontinuities and defects 
are determined by troubleshooting GTAW 
equipment, process, torch manipulation 
techniques and filler metal manipulation 
techniques 
D-15.04.12P repair weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
repaired by grinding/gouging and re -
welding 

=== PAGE 124 ===
 
124  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-15.04.13P re-start arc arc is re-started ensuring proper tie -ins 
and avoiding weld discontinuities  
D-15.04.14P finish weld  weld is finished showing proper tie -ins in 
all positions and containing no 
unacceptable weld discontinuities  
D-15.04.15P shut down equipment  equipment is shut down according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
Range of Variables 
amperage controls include: foot pedal, thumb control, remote, power source controls  
torch manipulation techniques include: walking the cup; forehand and backhand to achieve desired 
bead width and shape (weave and stringer)  
tacking includes: penetrating, bridge  
factors include: base metal, joint configuration, position, heat input, filler metal, WPS/WPDS  
tools include: wire wheels, wire brushes, chemical cleaners  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-15.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that have specialized 
applications for using GTAW process 
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-15.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
weld using GTAW equipment and 
components 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to welding using 
GTAW equipment 
  identify GTAW equipment and 
components used to weld, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify specialized GTAW equipment 
  identify types of welds, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down equipment  
  describe autogenous (no filler) welding 
technique 
  describe torch manipulation techniques 
  describe pre - and post -flow shielding  
  describe storage requirements for filler 
rods 

=== PAGE 125 ===
 
125  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  identify GTAW filler metals, and describe 
their classifications, characteristics, 
and applications  
  identify weld position 
  identify  joint configurations 
  identify  electrical characteristics 
  describe procedures to maintain travel 
speed, electrode angle and heat inputs 
  describe amperage requirements 
  describe pre -heating, post -heating and 
interpass temperature requirements for 
base metals 
  describe techniques to repair weld 
discontinuities  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle GTAW equipment, components 
and consumables  
D-15.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements to weld using 
GTAW equipment 
identify training and qualification 
requirements to weld using GTAW 
equipment 
D-15.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to welding using 
GTAW process 
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to welding using GTAW 
process  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: tungsten electrodes, gas lenses, collets, collet bodies, work lead 
clamps, torches and cables (leads), regulators/flow meters, shielding gases, hoses, water coolers, remote 
controls, cups  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, EMF, UV 
and infrared light, visible light rays,  radioactivity (thoriated tungsten)  
specialized GTAW equipment includes: robotic welders, orbital welders, automatic machines, semi -
automatic machines, hot wire 
types of welds include: fillet, groove, plug, slot, surfacing  
torch manipulation techniques include: walking the cup; forehand and backhand to achieve desired 
bead width and shape (weave and stringer)  
classifications include: AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, position, composition, F -numbers) 
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition  
weld position includes: flat, horizontal, vertical, overhead, 1G, 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G, 6G  
joint configurations include: butt, tee, edge, corner, lap  
electrical characteristics include: current type, duty cycle, amperage  

=== PAGE 126 ===
 
126  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Task D-16 Welds using submerged arc welding (SAW) process 
Task Descriptor 
The SAW process provides the highest production rate. The most difficult part of this process is setting up 
the equipment. It is the only wire feed process that may use AC and DC currents concurrently.  
This process is mostly used on large scale productions, including pressure vessels, tanks, bridges and 
ship construction.  
D-16.01 Selects SAW equipment and consumables 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-16.01.01P select power source power source is selected according to 
application and primary power supply 
availability  
D-16.01.02P select electrode type and diameter  electrode type and diameter is selected 
according to base metal thickness and 
composition, joint type and position and 
WPS/WPDS to ensure fusion and avoid 
weld discontinuities  
D-16.01.03P select flux flux is selected according to base metal 
thickness and composition, electrode 
selection, joint type and position and 
WPS/WPDS to ensure fusion and avoid 
weld discontinuities  
D-16.01.04P select SAW equipment and 
components 
SAW equipment and components are 
selected according to application  
Range of Variables 
power source includes: inverters, rectifiers, transformers  
flux includes: fused, bonded, active, reactive, neutral  
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener,  booms, tracks, flux recycling equipment  

=== PAGE 127 ===
 
127  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-16.01.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using SAW process  
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-16.01.02L demonstrate knowledge of SAW 
processes, equipment, components, 
consumables,  and their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
describe fundamentals of SAW process  
  identify SAW equipment, components 
and consumables, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify power sources, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  identify SAW electrodes, and describe 
their classifications, characteristics and 
applications  
  identify flux and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe storage requirements for SAW 
electrodes and flux 
  describe operating principles of SAW 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to SAW 
equipment, components and 
consumables found on drawings and 
specifications  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener,  booms, tracks, flux recycling equipment  
power source includes: inverters, rectifiers, transformers  
classifications include: AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, position, composition, F -numbers) 
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition  
flux includes: fused, bonded, active, reactive, neutral  

=== PAGE 128 ===
 
128  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-16.02 Sets up SAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-16.02.01P identify damage and defects in SAW 
equipment 
damage and defects in SAW equipment 
are identified  
D-16.02.02P select machine settings on power 
source(s) 
machine settings on power source(s) are 
selected according to SAW process  
D-16.02.03P connect cables (leads) to power 
source(s) and wire feeder 
cables (leads) are connected to power 
source(s) and wire feeder 
D-16.02.04P assemble equipment and components equipment and components are 
assembled  
D-16.02.05P adjust wire drive roll tension  wire drive roll tension is adjusted 
according to manufacturers’ specifications 
to achieve a consistent rate of wire feed  
D-16.02.06P feed wire through liner, drive rolls, barrel 
and contact tip, and clip end of wire for 
appropriate stick -out 
wire is fed through liner, drive rolls, barrel 
and contact tip, and end of wire is clipped 
for appropriate stick -out 
D-16.02.07P set required current type  required current type is set by adjusting 
selector switch or connecting cables 
(leads) to appropriate terminals  
D-16.02.08P attach work lead clamp to base metal  work lead clamp is attached to base metal 
to complete circuit  
D-16.02.09P fill flux hopper flux hopper is full  
D-16.02.10P verify setup  setup is verified by ensuring tracking 
consistency and required travel speed  
Range of Variables 
power source(s) includes: inverters, rectifiers, transformers  
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener, booms, tracks, flux recycling equipment, demagnetizer, 
runoff tabs  
flux includes: fused, bo nded, active, reactive, neutral  

=== PAGE 129 ===
 
129  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-16.02.01L demonstrate knowledge of SAW 
processes, equipment, components, 
and their characteristics, applications and 
operation 
identify SAW equipment and 
components, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  identify power source(s) 
  identify types of filler wire and flux 
combinations, and describe their 
classifications, characteristics and 
applications  
  describe operating principles of SAW 
equipment and components 
D-16.02.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set up SAW equipment and 
components 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to SAW equipment 
and components 
  describe procedures to set up SAW 
equipment and components 
  identify multiple wire setups and polarities 
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle SAW equipment and 
components 
  describe digital technology used in SAW 
processes  
D-16.02.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements pertaining to 
SAW equipment and components 
identify training and qualification 
requirements pertaining to SAW 
equipment and components 
  identify training and certification 
requirements and limitations pertaining to 
setting up primary wiring for SAW 
equipment 
D-16.02.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to SAW 
equipment and components 
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to SAW equipment and 
components 
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener, booms, tracks, flux recycling equipment, demagnetizer, 
runoff tabs  
power source(s) includes: inverters, rectifiers, transformers  
classifications (filler wire and flux) include : AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, composition)  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, slip 
hazards 
digital technology includes: waveform programming, realtime monitoring, pre -sets, frequency  

=== PAGE 130 ===
 
130  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-16.03 Sets operating parameters for SAW 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-16.03.01P determine parameters parameters are determined according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-16.03.02P set/adjust amperage  amperage is set/adjusted according to 
WPS/WPDS, base metal and electrode 
selected 
D-16.03.03P set wire feed speed and voltage  wire feed speed and voltage are set 
according to WPS/WPDS, base metal 
type and thickness, size and composition 
of wire, position of weld and selection of 
gas 
D-16.03.04P set electrode stick -out electrode stick -out is set according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-16.03.05P set flux rate  flux rate is set according to WPS/WPDS 
and application  
D-16.03.06P set travel speed  travel speed is set according to 
WPS/WPDS and application  
D-16.03.07P verify setup  setup is verified by welding a test 
specimen of same base metal, electrode 
and position  
 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-16.03.01L demonstrate knowledge of SAW 
processes, equipment, components, 
consumables,  and their characteristics, 
applications and operation  
describe fundamentals of SAW processes 
  identify SAW equipment, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe operating principles of SAW 
equipment 
  interpret and apply welding symbols and 
information pertaining to SAW equipment 
found on drawings and specifications  
  describe metric and imperial electrode 
and flux designations  

=== PAGE 131 ===
 
131  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-16.03.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
set operating parameters for SAW 
equipment 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to setting operating 
parameters for SAW equipment  
  describe procedures to set operating 
parameters for SAW equipment  
  describe digital technology used in SAW 
processes  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener, booms, tracks, flux recycling equipment, demagnetizer, 
runoff tabs  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, slip 
hazards 
digital technology includes: waveform programming, real -time monitoring, pre -sets, frequency  
D-16.04 Performs weld using SAW equipment 
 
NL NS PE NB QC ON MB SK AB BC NT YT NU 
yes yes yes yes NV yes yes yes yes yes NV NV NV 
 
 Skills 
 Performance Criteria Evidence of Attainment 
D-16.04.01P start up equipment  equipment is started up according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
D-16.04.02P adjust head height  head height is adjusted to maintain 
appropriate stick -out and to control flux 
coverage 
D-16.04.03P verify setup  setup is verified by performing a dry run to 
ensure tracking consistency  
D-16.04.04P initiate arc arc is initiated by engaging wire feed, 
travel and current according to 
manufacturers’ recommendations  
D-16.04.05P perform sequencing techniques  sequencing techniques are performed 
according to application, code, and 
controlling heat distortion  
D-16.04.06P monitor and adjust travel speed and angle travel speed and angle are monitored and 
adjusted to maintain consistent tracking  
D-16.04.07P recover, filter and demagnetize flux  flux is recovered, filtered and 
demagnetized according to client 
requirements and manufacturers’ 
specifications  
D-16.04.08P stop arc  arc is stopped ensuring proper tie-ins and 
avoiding weld discontinuities  

=== PAGE 132 ===
 
132  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
D-16.04.09P remove slag using tools slag is removed using tools 
D-16.04.10P identify weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
identified by performing visual inspection 
D-16.04.11P determine cause of weld discontinuities 
and defects  
cause of weld discontinuities and defects 
are determined by troubleshooting SAW 
equipment and process  
D-16.04.12P repair weld discontinuities and defects  weld discontinuities and defects are 
repaired by grinding/gouging and re -
welding 
D-16.04.13P finish weld  weld is finished showing proper tie -ins in 
all positions and containing no 
unacceptable weld discontinuities and 
defects  
D-16.04.14P shut down equipment  equipment is shut down according to safe 
operating procedures and manufacturers’ 
recommendations  
Range of Variables 
tools include: wire wheels, chipping hammers, wire brushes, grinding discs, air chippers, needle guns 
 Knowledge 
 Learning Outcomes Learning Objectives 
D-16.04.01L demonstrate knowledge of base metals, 
their characteristics and applications  
identify base metals, and describe their 
characteristics and applications  
  describe base metal chemical 
composition and metallurgy  
  identify base metals that can and cannot 
be welded using SAW process  
  identify ferrous and non -ferrous metals, 
and describe their characteristics and 
applications  
D-16.04.02L demonstrate knowledge of procedures to 
weld using SAW equipment and 
components 
identify hazards, and describe safe work 
practices pertaining to welding using SAW 
equipment and components 
  identify SAW equipment and 
components used to weld, and describe 
their procedures for use  
  identify types of welds, and describe 
their characteristics and applications  
  describe procedures to start up and shut 
down equipment  
  describe storage requirements for filler 
wire and flux 
  identify SAW electrodes, and describe 
their classifications, characteristics, 
and applications  

=== PAGE 133 ===
 
133  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
  identify  flux and describe its 
classifications, characteristics and 
applications  
  identify weld position 
  identify  joint configurations 
  identify  electrical characteristics 
  identify multiple arc configurations  
  describe procedures to maintain travel 
speed, stick-outs, angle and heat inputs  
  describe pre -heating, post -heating and 
interpass temperature requirements for 
base metals 
  describe techniques to repair weld 
discontinuities  
  describe procedures to control waste and 
recycle SAW equipment, components and 
consumables  
D-16.04.03L demonstrate knowledge of training and 
qualification requirements to weld using 
SAW equipment and components 
identify training and qualification 
requirements to weld using SAW 
equipment and components 
D-16.04.04L demonstrate knowledge of regulatory 
requirements pertaining to welding using 
SAW process  
identify codes, standards and regulations 
pertaining to welding using SAW process  
Range of Variables 
equipment and components include: drive rolls, contact tips, hoppers, work lead clamps, welding head 
and control system, cables, wire straightener, booms, sub -arc tractors, tracks, flux recovery system, 
demagnetizer, runoff tabs  
hazards include: burns, fumes, hazardous gases, falling objects, fire hazards, falling hazards, slip 
hazards, flux dust, moving equipment  
types of welds include: fillet, groove, surfacing  
flux includes: fused, bonded, active, reactive, neutral  
classifications include: AWS, CSA, ASME, (tensile strength, position, composition, F -numbers) 
characteristics include: tensile strength, position, composition  
weld position includes: flat, horizontal  
joint configurations include: butt, tee, surface build up  
electrical characteristics include: current type, duty cycle, amperage  
  

=== PAGE 134 ===
 
134  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Appendix A 
Acronyms  
  
AC alternating current 
ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers  
AWS American Welding Society  
CAC carbon arc cutting  
CAC-A air carbon arc cutting  
CC constant current 
CSA Canadian Standards Association  
CV constant voltage  
DC direct current 
EMF electromagnetic field  
FCAW flux cored arc welding  
GMAW gas metal arc welding  
GTAW gas tungsten arc welding  
GTSM grind to sound metal  
ITP inspection test plan  
LOTO lock out/tag out  
MCAW metal cored arc welding  
MPS methylacetylene-propadiene  
MTR mill test reports  
OFC oxy-fuel gas cutting  
OH&S Occupational Health and Safety  
PAC plasma arc cutting  
PAPR powered air purifying respirator  
PPE personal protective equipment  
SAW submerged arc welding  
SDS safety data sheet  
SMAW shielded metal arc welding  
UV ultraviolet 
WHMIS Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System  
WPDS Welding Procedures Data Sheets  
WPS Welding Procedures Specifications  
 
  

=== PAGE 135 ===
 
135  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Appendix B 
Tools and Equipment / Outils et équipement 
 
Hand Tools / Outils à main  
adjustable wrenches (various sizes)  clés à molette (de diverses grandeurs)  
aviation snips (left-cut, right -cut, straight -cut) cisailles de type aviation (coupe à gauche, 
coupe à droite, coupe droite)  
broom  balai 
brushes (bristle, wire, paint)  brosses (brosses en soie, brosses 
métalliques, pinceaux)  
chalk line cordeau à craie 
chisels (cold, diamond point, cape)  ciseaux (à froid, à pointe diamantée, bédane) 
clamps (C, bar, pipe)  serres (en C, à coulisse, pour tuyau)  
cylinder carts  chariots pour bouteilles  
cylinder cradles  berceaux pour bouteilles  
dollies  diables 
drift pin (bull pin)  tige d’assemblage (tige d’alignement)  
files (flat, half -round, rat-tail, bastard)  limes (plate, demi -ronde, queue-de-rat, 
bâtarde) 
flashlight  lampe de poche  
friction lighter  briquet à friction  
funnels entonnoirs 
hacksaw scie à métaux 
hammers (chipping, ball peen, claw, sledge)  marteaux (burineur, à panne ronde, à panne 
fendue, masse)  
hand shears cisailles manuelles 
hex wrenches (metric and imperial)  clés hexagonales (métriques et impériales)  
hydraulic jack  vérin hydraulique 
knives couteaux 
locking pliers  pinces-étaux 
magnets aimants 
oil can burette à huile 
pails (plastic and metal)  seaux (en plastique et en métal)  
pipe cutters  coupe-tuyaux 
pipe wrap isolant à tuyau  
pipe wrenches clés à tuyaux  
pliers (needle nose, MIG, slip joint)  pinces (à bec effilé, MIG, à joint coulissant) 
pry bars  leviers 
punches (center, prick)  pointeaux (centreur, de traçage)  
rollers rouleaux 

=== PAGE 136 ===
 
136  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
scrapers (various sizes)  grattoirs (de diverses grandeurs)  
screwdrivers (flat, Phillips, Robertson; hex -
head; various sizes)  
tournevis (à tête plate, à pointe cruciforme, à 
pointe carrée, à pointe hexagonale ; de 
diverses grandeurs)  
shovels (flat mouth)  pelles (carrées) 
soapstone markers  marqueurs en stéatite 
socket sets (metric and imperial)  jeux de douilles (métriques et impériales)  
soldering iron  fer à souder  
stamping tools  outils à estamper  
tip cleaners nettoyeurs de buse  
tool boxes  coffres à outils  
vises (bench vise, chain vise)  étaux (d’établi, à chaîne) 
water hose boyau d’arrosage  
wrench sets (open and closed ends; metric 
and imperial) 
jeux de clés (ouvertes et polygonales; 
métriques et impériales)  
Layout, Measuring and Testing Tools / Outils de traçage, de mesure et d’essai  
ammeters ampèremètres 
bridge cam gauge  jauge de came de pont  
calculators calculatrices 
calipers compas d’épaisseur  
combination square set  équerres combinées  
depth gauges  jauges de profondeur  
feeler gauges  jauges d’épaisseur  
fillet gauges  calibres de soudure d’angle  
hi-lo gauge  jauge de profondeur (hi -lo) 
laser levels niveaux au laser 
leak testing supplies  matériaux pour les tests d’étanchéité  
measuring tape ruban à mesurer 
micrometers micromètres 
plumb bobs  fils à plomb  
pyrometers  pyromètres 
radius marker marqueur de rayon 
ruler règle 
scribers pointes à tracer  
spirit levels  niveaux à bulle 
squares équerres 
stair gauges  calibres de traçage  
straight edges  règles de précision  
temperature indicating crayons and pellets  crayons et pastilles thermosensibles  
tri-square équerre de menuisier 

=== PAGE 137 ===
 
137  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
torpedo levels  niveaux torpilles  
torque wrench clé dynamométrique  
trammel points  compas à verge  
vernier calipers pieds à coulisse  
v-wac gauge jauge de mesure v -wac 
Power Tools and Equipment / Équipement et outils mécaniques  
air chipper marteau-burineur pneumatique 
air hoses and nozzles  tuyaux d’air et buses  
band saws scies à ruban 
buffers  polissoirs  
chop saws (cut -off saws)  scies à tronçonner (ébouteuses) 
circular saws scies circulaires  
coil heating equipment  équipement de chauffage par résistance  
cold cut saws  scies à froid  
communication devices (two-way radios, smart 
phones) 
appareils de communication (radios avec 
émetteur-récepteur, téléphones 
intelligents) 
compressors  compresseurs  
drills (portable, hammer, electric, magnetic)  perceuses (portative, marteau -perforateur, 
électrique, magnétique)  
extension cords  rallonges électriques 
grinders (die, bench, pedestal, angle)  meuleuses (à rectifier les matrices, d’établi, 
sur socle, d’angle)  
heating tips (rosebuds)  buses de chauffage  
hydraulic press brake  presse-plieuse hydraulique  
hydraulic rams béliers hydrauliques 
hydraulic shears cisailles hydrauliques  
hydrostatic equipment  équipement hydrostatique  
impact wrenches (electric or pneumatic)  clés à chocs (électriques ou pneumatiques)  
ironworkers cisailles-poinçonneuses  
needle gun pistolet à aiguilles 
nibblers grignoteuses  
pipe beveling machines  machines à biseauter les tuyaux  
pipe cutters  coupe-tuyaux 
pneumatic equipment  équipement pneumatique  
portable heaters  appareils de chauffage portatifs  
power hacksaws scies à métaux électriques 
power vises  étaux mécaniques 
propane torch (tiger torch)  chalumeau à propane (buse de lance -
flammes) 

=== PAGE 138 ===
 
138  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
reamers (hand held or mounted on power 
threader) 
alésoirs (à main ou monté sur filière 
mécanique) 
reciprocating saws  scies alternatives 
routers toupies  
sanders ponceuses  
vacuums (wet/dry) aspirateurs (pour déchets secs et humides)  
winches treuils 
 
Material Handling Equipment / Équipement de manutention  
beam clamps  attaches de poutre  
beam trolley  chariots à poutre  
cable clamps  serre-câbles 
chain block hoists  palans à chaîne 
chains chaînes 
chokers élingues à étranglement 
cranes (overhead, gantry-type, monorail, boom) grues (pont roulant, grue à portique, grue 
monorail, grue à flèche)  
dunnage (blocking)  fardage (blocage)  
forklifts  chariots élévateurs à fourche  
jackstands  chandelles 
lever hoists (come -alongs) (cable or chain)  palans (à câble ou à chaîne)  
lifting rings  anneaux de levage 
manual wire rope hoist  palan à main à câble d’acier  
overhead hoists  palans suspendus  
plate clamps  pinces à plaques  
portable boom  flèche portative  
rope cordage  
shackles manilles 
slings élingues 
softeners  protect eurs d’élingues 
spreader bars palonniers 
tuggers chariots tracteurs  

=== PAGE 139 ===
 
139  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Access Equipment / Équipement d’accès  
aerial work platforms  plateformes de travail élévatrices 
angel wing basket  nacelle (angel wing) 
ladders échelles 
personnel basket  nacelle 
scaffolding  échafaudage 
scissor lifts  plateformes élévatrices à ciseaux 
swing stage  échafaudage volant  
Personal Protective Equipment and Safety Equipment / Équipement de protection 
individuelle et de sécurité 
air hoods  cagoules à adduction d’air  
air/gas monitoring devices  appareils de surveillance de l’air/des gaz 
aprons tabliers 
body harness/lanyards  harnais/cordes de retenue 
coveralls combinaisons  
ear-plugs and ear muffs  bouchons d’oreilles et cache-oreilles antibruit  
face shields  écrans faciaux  
fire blankets  couvertures ignifuges  
fire extinguishers extincteurs 
fire hoses  boyaux  d’incendie 
fire retardant clothing  vêtement ignifuges  
flashback arrestors  dispositifs antiretour de flamme  
gloves  gants 
goggles  lunettes-masque de protection  
hard hats casques de sécurité  
masks (particle, vapour)  masques (contre les particules, contre les 
vapeurs) 
powered air purifying respirator (PAPR)  respirateur filtrant à ventilation assistée  
respirators respirateurs 
reverse-flow check valve  clapets anti -retour à écoulement inversé  
safety boots  bottes de sécurité  
safety glasses  lunettes de sécurité  
welding shield  masque de soudeur  

=== PAGE 140 ===
 
140  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Cutting, Gouging and Welding Equipment / Équipement de coupage, de gougeage et de 
soudage  
cable connectors  raccords de câble  
electrode holders  porte-électrodes  
electrode ovens  fours à électrodes  
oxy-fuel cutting and welding equipment  équipement d’oxycoupage et de soudage à 
l’oxygaz  
torches (GTAW, plasma, oxy -fuel, arc-air) chalumeaux (GTAW, plasma, oxygaz, air-arc) 
welding and plasma power sources  sources d’alimentation pour le soudage et le 
coupage au plasma  
welding cables  câbles de soudage  
welding guns  pistolets à souder  
wire feeders dévidoirs  
work lead clamp (grounding clamp)  pince du câble de masse (pince de mise à la 
terre) 
 
  

=== PAGE 141 ===
 
141  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
Appendix C 
Glossary / Glossaire 
 
 
arc welding process that uses an 
electric arc to produce 
a molten puddle to join 
metals 
soudage à l’arc procédé dans lequel on 
utilise un arc électrique 
pour produire un bain 
de fusion servant à 
assembler les métaux  
atomized gas a gas formed when a 
liquid is dispersed as a 
stream of droplets  
gaz atomisé gaz formé lorsqu’un 
liquide est dispersé 
comme un jet de 
gouttes  
backfire condition in which torch 
flame rapidly burns 
back into the torch tip 
making a pronounced 
popping sound and 
causing the gases to 
rapidly re-ignite; this is 
usually caused by  an 
excessively dirty torch 
tip or low gas 
pressures 
claquement condition par laquelle 
la flamme brûle 
rapidement de 
nouveau dans la buse 
ou la tête du 
chalumeau, ce qui 
produit un bruit 
prononcé de 
claquement et 
provoque la 
réinflammation rapide 
des gaz; cette 
condition est 
généralement causée 
par une buse ou une 
tête de chalumeau trop 
sale ou par de faibles 
pressions de gaz  
barrel extension for the sub -
arc tip; a straight torch 
canon rallonge pour la pointe 
de soudage à l’arc 
submergé; chalumeau 
droit 
connector 
(female/male) 
used at the end of 
welding cables or torch 
hoses to connect 
cables or hoses 
together 
raccord 
(femelle/mâle) 
raccords posés aux 
extrémités des câbles 
de soudage ou des 
tuyaux d’un chalumeau 
qui servent à joindre 
les câbles ou les 
tuyaux 
consumables materials that are 
consumed in the 
course of welding and 
cutting operations  
consommables matériaux qui sont 
consommées au cours 
du soudage et du 
coupage  

=== PAGE 142 ===
 
142  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
contact tip (contact 
tube) 
tip found at the end of 
a welding gun in which 
electricity is transferred 
from the gun to the 
consumable wire 
before the wire enters 
the weld zone 
tube-contact pointe que l’on 
retrouve au bout du 
pistolet de soudage 
dans lequel l’électricité 
passe du pistolet au fil 
fusible avant que le fil 
atteigne la zone de 
soudure 
current type electrical 
characteristics 
including the current 
(AC, DC) and type 
(AC, DCEN, DCEP)  
type de courant caractéristiques 
électriques incluant le 
courant (CA et CC) et 
le type (CA, courant 
continu avec électrode 
négative, courant 
continu avec électrode 
positive)  
decant to pour (a liquid) from 
one container into 
another 
décanter transvider (un liquide) 
d’un contenant à un 
autre 
drawings prints (blueprints), 
assembly drawings, 
detail drawings, shop 
and fabrication 
drawings, hand-drawn 
sketches, engineered 
drawings; used to 
understand types and 
placement of welds  
dessins plans (bleus), dessins 
d’assemblage, 
détaillés, d’atelier de 
de fabrication, 
schémas dessinés à la 
main et dessins 
techniques. Ils sont  
utilisés pour 
comprendre le type de 
soudure et leur position 
drive rolls in wire feed, equipment 
that comes in various 
sizes and is used to 
drive wire through liner 
to gun contact tip  
galets d’entraînement éléments de différentes 
grandeurs du dévidoir 
qui servent à guider le 
fil-électrode à travers la 
gaine jusqu’au tube -
contact du pistolet  
dunnage blocking or cribbing 
used to support a load 
fardage calage utilisé pour 
soutenir une charge 
electrode (rod) ovens ovens that are 
maintained at a certain 
temperature to keep 
electrodes stabilized 
and dry 
fours à électrodes 
(baguettes de 
soudage) 
fours qui sont 
maintenus à une 
température précise 
pour conserver les 
électrodes stables et 
sèches 
electrode extension 
(stick-out) 
amount of filler wire, 
tungsten, or other 
material protruding 
from the gun’s contact 
tip or cup of the 
equipment 
longueur terminale 
(longueur libre) 
quantité de fil d’apport, 
de tungstène ou autre 
matériau sortant du 
tube-contact du pistolet 
ou de la coupelle de 
l’équipement 

=== PAGE 143 ===
 
143  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
electrode a metal core that has a 
flux coating baked on 
the outside that is 
connected with a 
power source to create 
an electric arc 
électrode fil métallique recouvert 
d’une couche de flux 
cuite sur la partie 
extérieure, connecté à 
une source 
d’alimentation pour 
créer un arc électrique 
filler wire consumable melted 
during the welding 
process that becomes 
part of the weldment  
fil d’apport consommable fondu au 
cours du procédé de 
soudage qui fait 
ensuite partie de 
l’ensemble soudé 
flashback arrestor type of equipment that 
prevents possible 
explosions due to 
ignition of gases in the 
hoses of oxy -fuel or 
air/fuel equipment  
dispositif antiretour 
de flamme 
dispositif qui prévient 
les explosions que 
peut provoquer 
l’allumage des gaz 
dans les tuyaux 
flexibles  de 
l’équipement de 
coupage ou de 
soudage oxygaz ou 
aérogaz 
flow meter meter used in 
conjunction with a 
regulator to measure 
the volume of gases 
used in welding 
processes  
débitmètre instrument utilisé avec 
un manodétendeur 
pour mesurer le 
volume de gaz utilisés 
au cours du soudage  
flux a material applied 
before or during joint 
preparation or 
surfacing to remove 
oxides and 
contaminants 
flux matériel appliqué avant 
ou pendant la 
préparation d’un joint 
ou le surfaçage pour 
enlever les oxydes et 
les contaminants  
gas diffuser device to distribute 
shielding gas in a 
GMAW, FCAW or 
MCAW process  
diffuseur de gaz dispositif qui distribue 
le gaz de protection 
pour les procédés 
GMAW, FCAW et 
MCAW 
gas lens in gas tungsten arc 
welding, a collet body 
holder that diffuses the 
gas and grips the 
tungsten  
lentilles à gaz dans le procédé de 
soudage à l’arc sous 
gaz avec électrode de 
tungstène, porte -
électrode à mandrin 
qui diffuse le gaz et 
serre l’électrode de 
tungstène 
guns part of certain types of 
welding equipment that 
is actually held in the 
hand and is used to 
control the filler wire  
pistolets partie de certains types 
d’équipement de 
soudage qui est tenue 
dans la main et qui est 
utilisée pour contrôler 
le fil d’apport  

=== PAGE 144 ===
 
144  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
heat treatment any application of heat 
to metal assemblies for 
the purpose of 
bending, stress 
relieving, preheating, 
hardening, or 
tempering 
traitement thermique exposition des 
assemblages 
métalliques à la 
chaleur dans le but de 
les plier ou de les 
soumettre à la 
relaxation des 
contraintes, au 
préchauffage, au 
durcissement ou au 
revenu 
inverter power 
sources  
power sources 
designed to operate on 
a high cycle to provide 
high amperage in a 
smaller unit 
onduleurs sources d’alimentation 
conçues pour 
fonctionner à haute 
fréquence de manière 
à permettre à un petit 
appareil de fournir une 
intensité de courant 
élevée 
magnetic particle 
examination 
test involving magnetic 
yokes and iron filings 
to determine the 
existence of defects or 
cracks in the surface of 
the welds 
contrôle 
magnétoscopique 
essai qui permet de 
déceler les défauts ou 
les fissures dans les 
soudures au moyen 
d’aimants et de 
limailles de fer 
metallurgy branch of science that 
involves the chemical 
analysis of metals and 
alloys 
métallurgie branche de la science 
qui comprend l’analyse 
chimique des métaux 
et des alliages  
modified short-circuit 
transfer 
a controlled short -
circuit transfer GMAW 
process to make 
single-sided root welds 
on pipe  
transfert par court-
circuit modifié 
transfert par court -
circuit contrôlé par 
procédé GMAW utilisé 
pour créer une soudure 
à la racine d’un seul 
côté d’un tuyau  
nozzle a device that directs 
shielding media  
buse dispositif qui dirige le 
gaz de protection  
pickling paste acidic compound 
applied to the surface 
of stainless steel to 
replenish the oxide 
layer, returning the 
steel to its original 
condition  
pâte décapante composé acide 
appliqué sur la surface 
de l’acier inoxydable 
pour reconstituer la 
couche d’oxyde, ce qui 
remet l’acier dans son 
état d’origine  

=== PAGE 145 ===
 
145  Red Seal Occupational Standard - Welder  
postheating heating assemblies 
after final welds are 
complete to remove 
stresses, often 
involving wrapping the 
assembly in fire -
retardant materials to 
allow even distribution 
of heat  
postchauffage chauffage des 
assemblages une fois 
les soudures finales 
effectuées pour 
enlever les contraintes, 
ce qui nécessite 
souvent 
l’enveloppement de 
l’assemblage dans des 
produits ignifuges pour 
permettre une 
distribution égale de la 
chaleur 
preheating heating metals to a 
desired temperature to 
aid in the welding 
process  
préchauffage chauffage des métaux 
à une température 
souhaitée pour faciliter 
le procédé de soudage 
puddle pool or puddle of 
molten material that 
forms the bond 
between pieces that 
are being welded  
bain de fusion bassin de matière 
fondue qui constitue la 
liaison entre les pièces 
que l’on soude  
regulator piece of equipment that 
regulates the flow 
and/or pressure of 
gases through a hose  
manodétendeur appareil qui assure la 
régulation du débit ou 
de la pression des gaz 
dans un tuyau 
slag a nonmetallic product 
resulting from the 
mutual dissolution of 
flux and nonmetallic 
impurities in some 
welding and brazing 
processes  
laitier produit non métallique 
résultant de la 
dissolution mutuelle du 
flux et des impuretés 
non métalliques dans 
certains procédés de 
soudage et de brasage 
temperature 
measuring devices 
devices used to 
measure temperature 
for pre-heat, interpass 
and post -heat 
applications  
dispositifs de mesure 
de la température 
dispositifs utilisés pour 
mesurer la température 
de préchauffage, de 
passe intermédiaire et 
de postchauffage  
transformer rectifiers type of welding power 
source that brings in 
AC power and rectifies 
it to DC through the 
use of a diode  
redresseur type de source 
d’alimentation pour le 
soudage qui redresse 
le courant alternatif  
(CA) en courant 
continu (CC) au moyen 
d’une diode  
work lead clamp clamp fastened to the 
end of a welding cable 
that is then fastened 
onto a work piece to 
allow for a completed 
welding circuit  
pince du câble de 
masse 
pince fixée au bout 
d’un câble de soudage 
qui est lui -même fixé 
sur la pièce à souder, 
ce qui complète le 
circuit de soudage  
 
 